Alcatraz’s amazing meals
Monkey torture ring
Dark web rabbit hole
Swamps of Dagobah
Direct democracy: government IDs, vote on issues. 
On our reality
On Thinking
Thinking about things while high
On intelligence.
On religion.
On democracy. 
On progress and Big Tech: what it means to work ‘in tech’.
Do a software engineer’s obligations begin and end with the company? 
Whether or not ChatGPT ever felt ‘conscious’, media descriptions of it, especially at the peak of its fame, led to a large number of people having sufficiently anthropomorphized ChatGPT to feel emotional responses to conversations with it. I was fucking around with it some time ago and on a particular instance of horrifying stupidity (contradicting itself in a very authoritative tone, in exactly consecutive sentences), and I truly wanted to reach out and kick it in its motherboard. I couldn’t bring myself to even call it a retard, even though I knew there is no ‘it’. I am sure there are others who would behave this way, as there are those who would have no problem letting their creativity fly being as cruel as they could be. I wonder what the difference is. 
Surreal project
On culture.
On what language tells us to feel.
The climate footprint of nonsense
Coming to terms with our programming
Information inequality: people who know ‘less’ are at a permanent disadvantage.
Brain throughput: upper limit on how ‘fast’ our lives can get and still be functional
A list of proposed ridiculous rules in celebration of a hypothetical anarchist dystopia/ Constitutional theory for the end times
Assorted thought experiments.
Funny stuff: Advertising and marketing: the root cause of all the world’s problems.
The desperate screams on change.org.
Tired whimper of a life.
Rings dropped into gopher-holes and storm drains
My agate collection, my embassy in their territory. 
We will all perish. Our homes, offices, parliaments and prisons will become canvases for artists and vandals alike, and eventually, a planet-wide layer of weathered concrete dust.
Science, desperation, untestable theories. List fantasy machines that would be able to test the theory: is your theory fundamentally untestable, or could some hypothetical imaginary machine do it? If so, describe it. Turn it into an engineering problem. Make it the next generation’s headache, but tell them what they need to do, and in just a few decades, they’ll ask their personal AGI to build it for them.
The truth is, the ‘world’ is too big to include in any meaningful picture of reality; we can certainly refer to it (as we do), but it is ultimately an ornament, a vehicle for grandiose statements in the superlative; one step short of the universe. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZkA5mLPdQpU
Losing your hair is a sign that you have served your ordained purpose, and it is now time to withdraw from society.
Absolute good: Ashens violin. 
Fundamental goal of life: “Why are we here” vs “what are we supposed to be doing”: “Maximize predictability” paradigm.
Let’s consider this task: Given a body, tie a string around its widest latitude. This loop has a certain length, and represents the circumference of the body. We are required to determine a length of string, that when added to the present string, increases this circumference of the resultant circle by exactly one meter. Let us call this task ‘boinging’. It turns out that a string of length 2*pi will boing every single object in the universe - whether a tennis ball or a supermassive black hole, a string of length 2*pi will boing exactly. 





