This is a collection of my ideas and opinions on subjects I find interesting, in no order.
Here are a few facts concerning this book:
1.	Large parts of this book will be deeply offensive, even shocking. 
2.	Very little research has gone into this book, if any at all. 
3.	There likely is no point to this book.
4.	This does not deserve to be taken too seriously. Especially if you like it. 
5.	As the author, my advice and strong recommendation is to put this down and walk away.
If you insist on reading, for best results, imagine you are in your favourite pub. What follows is the drunk rant of the old man sitting by himself in the corner. 

Chapter 1.
Are we there yet?
It is hard not to draw parallels between the current political, ecological and social state of the world, and John B Calhoun’s experiments on overpopulation, societal collapses and the ultimate psychological cost of decadence. The applicability of his experiments to human society has been disputed, as have been his interpretation of the results, but even if you consider the entire experiment to be fiction, it is still a powerful and compelling analogy for our own current condition in more than one way; in any case, I believe it deserves a second examination – the world has changed significantly since his time, making his interpretations all the more prescient.
If you have read about this experiment, skip ahead. If not, here is an extremely abridged summary. 
An enclosure for Norway rats was built. They were supplied with unlimited food and water. 
It was expected that given no obvious impediments to their growth, the population would keep growing into the thousands over the course of about two years. Instead, across iterations, the experiment would invariably end with the opposite: the mice would breed rapidly initially, but soon the population would level off, then following by the rats breaking up into small cliques comprising of a dozen or so individuals; individual rats would develop hostile, anti-social and sedentary habits, and eventually, the population would die out entirely.
Among those iterations, was Universe 25. It had a nearly three square-meter enclosure, consisting of four pens, two hundred and fifty-six living compartments, and sixteen burrows leading to abundant food and water supplies. 
Each living compartment could house up to fifteen individual rats, with an overall capacity of three thousand.
The clean, comfortable enclosure with an endless supply of food and water, with no diseases or predators around, was as close to luxury as a rat could ever get. Into this paradise, the experiment began with four pairs of healthy mice. 
The first hundred or so days were spent acclimating to their new surroundings, marking territory, and nesting. Soon after, the rats began taking advantage of their resources, and breeding rapidly, with the population doubling every two months. 
By the end of about a year, the enclosure contained over six hundred mice. And then began their decline.
The number of rats at this point was about a fifth of what the enclosure could hold. And yet, most rats seemed to prefer crowding in specific areas, sharing the same food sources. This constant huddling soon gave way to a decline in mating activity, with the birth rate falling to about a third of its original level. Of the rats in the enclosure at this point, a third emerged as socially dominant, with the other two-thirds showing marked decline in social skills and status. 
Behavioral disparities males of different social stature became more marked. Those individuals at the bottom of the social order found themselves spurned by females, and eventually abandoned trying to mate altogether. With no need to hunt and no mate, these rats had no function with their society. These outcasts would soon peel off the group entirely, eating and sleeping on their own, or fighting with other outcasts. The dominant males on the other hand, became more aggressive, even needlessly so, violently attacking other individuals with no provocation or motive, indiscriminately raping other rats irrespective of their sex. 
Most other males that comprised the middle of the social order, grew timid and passive, accepting violent attacks without protests, often dying in the process, even being cannibalized in several instances. With the males having abandoned (or been deprived of) their social functions, females were left to adopt male roles during the rearing of pups. Consequently, some adopted more aggressive behaviour, with their own young being the victims of this frequently. Others shirked their own functions as well, abandoning their own litter and withdrawing from mating activities. Infant mortality reached nearly ninety percent.
About a year and a half into the experiment, the population started to decline. Infant mortality was now about a hundred percent. From these circumstances rose another social group, the rats that had reached maturity but had grown up in extremely dysfunctional circumstances, and indeed, had never been exposed to a normal society with healthy relationships. With no concept of, and interest in ‘normal’ social activities and interactions like mating or marking territory, this group spent all their waking time eating, drinking, and grooming themselves.
These ‘beautiful ones’ as Calhoun called them, lived in seclusion. They avoided the anarchic social conditions by rejecting society itself.
With every fundamental motivation that drives life having made irrelevant, no need to establish a territory or find a mate or raise young or hunt for food, these individuals found themselves in a society that had no need for them. Individuals were reduced to aimless, self-absorbed entities that did nothing, for there was nothing to do.
The population eventually died out entirely.  Calhoun called this the second death – the first was, in his view, the beginning of the end, the complete loss of purpose in the rats’ lives. He attempted to salvage this implosion by placing some of the ‘beautiful ones’ into new enclosures that had not fallen to the anarchic conditions of their own, hoping the change in circumstances might wake them from their anti-social catatonia. He failed. The rats simply would not change their behaviour. The eventually died out of natural causes, alone.
Universe 25 peaked at 2200 rats. None of them survived.
The applicability of the above results as an unnervingly accurate metaphor for our own current state is obvious; indeed, the only danger here is of over-interpretation. After all, even the world today resembles Calhoun’s rat utopia, we are not rats, and it seems we may have more agency over our own fate than rats. Whether that will make a difference at all remains to be seen. I do not believe it does; studying rats and their behaviour allows us a certain objectivity we cannot muster when studying ourselves, and anyway, your view will depend on whether you see the rats as sentient beings with their own will and volition, or as a lower being that functions like an automaton, being driven to do things its wiring will permit it to, and nothing else, that is, whether the collapse of the rat utopia was simply the inevitable consequence of the combination of their own nature and the circumstances they were put in, or a result of their own deliberate choices. But at the end of the day, even in humans, whether the specific choices made were deliberate, or a consequence of our wiring, is irrelevant, because both seem to eventually lead to extinction.
This story should serve as the background noise while you read the rest of the book.


Chapter 1.5

A note on the purpose of this book.

Of the myriad social, cultural, economic and ecological problems we are currently battling via passionate speeches, government pledges, and online arguments, there are few new issues if any; we have been arguing about more or less, the exact same set of problems for decades, if not centuries. I believe this is because of flaws fundamental to our nature, flaws that we have refused to acknowledge and therefore have never attempted to remedy. 

Consider climate change; we have known of it for decades, and in fact, Shell released a paper way back in the 1970s, stating clearly that increased emissions, CO2 particularly, would lead to climate change. We have a company of humans, who knew fifty years ago that their industry would lead to unspeakable disaster, and yet chose not only to continue their business, but even expanded into coal. It is easy to call these executives psychopaths, parasites that are quite literally selling future generations, and this is in fact how they are often written about. It is easy to succumb to the same detached nihilism we know so well today, or to just shrug, shake our heads and tut in silent resignation. Now, I do not really care about human extinction; I see our current behavior as an inevitable consequence of our nature, and specifically our aspirations that are fundamentally opposed to our nature and therefore doomed to fail. In any case human survival was never an important issue for me; I have seen entire habitats razed to the ground, species wiped out, my favourite places in the world shat upon and carbonized - I have little sympathy for our kind, especially because I am part of it, and therefore guilty of the same crimes, if not on the same scales. But one must admit, to start with a pristine, spectacular planet, the sort that inspired people to invent gods just to thank them for its beauty, and destroy it in less than ten thousand years of civilization is a truly monumental achievement, especially so considering this was not something we were trying to achieve - this came naturally to us; since the first human used a piece of flint to scratch a drawing onto the wall of a cave for the first time, every individual and collective decision that was invariably locally sensible (culturally, economically, temporally), led us to our current position, one step at a time. Each of us is a dot on a page of human history, and while it seems inconceivably long to us standing in it, it is barely a blip in a cosmic sense - remember, one of our first major achievements as a species - the extinction of our sister branches of the genus Homo, all the more impressive considering we actually interbred with some of them, predated all civilization. There is evidence of about a dozen species of archaic humans, and several more unidentified ones - and yet we are the only ones left. If one considers ourselves, modern humans, to be the pinnacle of evolution, these sister species, denisovans, neanderthals, were as close to it as a species could get, with comparable intelligence and abilities- and yet we are the only ones left. Of course, we do not know why this is, so there is little point in implying our species had any role to play in their demise, but it is also undeniable that there was SOME reason we survived. If we did not actively (or passively) cause their extinction, there must have been a specific advantage we have, that those other species did not. There has been significant research on this subject, and we still do not definitely know why we were the only survivors during a relatively comfortable time (their problems were not easy either, but they were simple), mostly because hominin fossils are so rare. As an aside, every time I see a building being constructed, I imagine an excavator tearing through some fossil or artefact of monumental importance that would fill in the gaps in our knowledge of our own history, and my heart breaks a little. Imagine how many such artefacts we probably have obliterated, how many of those languish under prisons and brothels and drug dens and government offices and sewage pipelines, how many remains of our ancient past people have kissed or killed standing over, the wars fought, the bombs dropped, the drills and borewells shoved through, how many activities our species partakes in, and how much of our past and present we wipe out. It is paralyzing.
Anyway. Common assessments of this phenomenon are performed through the eyes of a human observer standing within human society as a human, perceiving through human eyes, percolating information through layers of human biases, ideologies and cultural beliefs. This has been done before, and as always, would be inconsequential. 


But something fundamental to our collective consciousness has changed in the past few decades; I see it in the lyrics to songs, singers that went from singing about human experiences, love, loss, tragedy, power, heartbreak - to money, violence, and rage, even in love. I see a shift not in our values, but the things we value. I see it in TV interviews, from the quiet, deep and dignified interviews of Dick Cavett, to the unhinged, impotent screams of anchors and talk-show hosts today. I see it in the fading away of the appreciation of real art, music, literature, the death of social consciousness, the tacit approval and even encouragement of qualities, that while extremely human, were still qualities that were considered to be detestable for much of human history (for good reason), the frequent confusion of aspirational ideals with 'toxic' social demands, and broadly, the death of such valuable and powerful ideas like dignity, patience, honesty, nobility, and honour.

The question therefore, in my view, is not 'how' we can solve our problems, but why we find ourselves unable to. There are several ways of looking at this. We could try and understand this as a qualitative deficiency in our very nature, or a more pragmatic and grounded explanation like greed. With climate change, for example, no matter how serious our circumstances and how elegant our solutions, we need it to be 'economically feasible'. There is no cosmic barrier stopping us from abandoning coal power plants and start building nuclear reactors, for example (the claim of nuclear reactors being dangerous is nonsense - we know how to build them safely and well, and we have done so all around the world. Disasters occur when standards are not adhered to.). There is nothing stopping us from banning cigarettes globally, even knowing beyond a shadow of doubt that smoking-related illnesses are not just local tragedies but an enormous national cost. Nothing, except our own preferences, which seem to be almost always detrimental to our own existence, or that of the other creatures we share our ecosystems with. So why are we the way we are, and are we really getting worse?

As we speak, we share our world with people who enjoy torturing baby animals, people who enjoy sex with children, women desperate enough to allow themselves to be subjected to inhumane torture for money living close to people who will gladly pay to torture a naked and defenseless person, world leaders who are still trying to expand their national territory, armies holding their own people hostage, coprophiliacs, flat earthers, religious fundamentalists, people who hate religious fundamentalists, people who have generalized their hate for religious fundamentalism to entire religions, cultures, or nations, people who hate the people who hate religious fundamentalists, people who hate people of a specific complexion, or national origin, language, physical appearance, people killing rhino's for their horns for longer erections, elephants for their tusks, tigers for their claws, sharks for their fins, rapists, murders ... an increasing percentage of the constellation of activities that we engage in as a species, the locus of everything we do, seems to be actively harmful to us, our environment, or the other creatures that live in it. As I see it, we are currently engaged in a process of cleaning house, a good thing; only as we allow the unnecessary self-imposed restrictions on gender expression or sexual orientation (among other things) to fall away, we have also allowed a precipitous fall in our individual standards of propriety. As always, we see the ends as justifying the means, and as has been the case throughout our history as species, when a group of people is convinced it has moral right on its side (whether self-assigned or divinely proclaimed), the baby goes out with the bathwater, and once this happens, there is no way to return to civilized discourse.
To make matters worse, this change is not isolated to a single country or culture, but seems to be happening across nations. This compounds our problem, because each culture has its own cultural universe, with its own laws, unspoken rules, priorities and definitions of good and bad. Even within a culture, there are more or less equally powerful ideological factions, each with constitutionally mandated rights to free speech. Somehow, the most oppressive ideas are common to these disparate, disconnected cultures; an American Christian conservative likely agrees with Middle-Eastern Muslim conservatives, or Indian Hindu conservatives, in the idea that homosexuality is a depraved defiance of god's divine instruction.
At the same time, I see us running out of energy, a species so burnt out it really cannot be bothered with more arguments anymore; the socially conscious are either screaming lunatics or burnt out husks sheltering at home. We are ncreasingly less able to deal with the firehose of information, social media, news, and shit television - there is just too much. Our problems are not just the problem anymore - we are battling our tendency to keep getting stuck in positions like this, while being very close, if not over, the limits of the amount of information our human brains can meaningfully process at once.



Most research on this subject comes from qualified experts (as it should), philosophers, psychologists, scientists and religious leaders, who have spent many years studying and researching and understanding the human condition through the lens of their own field. This is obviously invaluable work from an academic perspective, but I do not think we have the time to wait for the findings and warnings of all this research to organically trickle down into our collective consciousness and awaken our latent sense of fear and responsibilty. In my opinion, what is actually needed is not merely an understanding of our current circumstances, but also of the underlying qualities that lead us here. We need to look at our current circumstances not as natural progressions from our previous states, but as isolated problems affecting an isolated planet, in an isolated time, without getting bogged down with historical details and sentimental considerations. Of course, it is almost certain that any results achieved with these qualitative demands would be impractical, but one, it isn't like practical suggestions have a likelihood of being adopted soon enough to matter anyway, and two, I haven't even understood the problem entirely yet. Therefore, for the purposes of this text, we will assume no moral values, no laws, and no ideological determinations of right and wrong and no specialized education, and attempt to reason our way out of this rut. I need to understand, as best as I can, everything I know, from my own perception, my mind, my conscious self, the implicit flaws in our construction and the consequent risks we incur, and then explore, how our flaws as individuals conspire with our flaws as a social species, and take us from uncivilized, free beasts roaming a bountiful planet to a miserable and diseased species choking itself with its own money. 
Finally, for the Average Human to benefit from any structural changes in our collective thought process or philosophies, they must be voluntary adoptions from the ground up, and not suggestions from authorities from the top down. In addition, for such structural changes to even be considered for potential acceptances, it must appeal to the vast majority of people, who do not have the education, interest, exposure, or ability to learn enough about human history, anthropology, archeology, psychology, physics, and political science to have a 'correct' view of the world, meaning there can be no overreliance on absolutes, no laws that end in "that is just how it is", and that this system must make sense intuitively and immediately, while allowing one to comfortably perceive and process information and avoid incorrect decisions without demanding years of formal education. After all, one curious click on a flat-earth video thumbnail, one curious click on a Peterson or Crowder or Shapiro thumbnail, and suddenly you find youself inundated by increasingly more extreme views, frequently ending up watching videos of people saying "I identify as an attack helicopter". This is also true of the 'other' side - start with pro-LGBTQ content, and you will be slowly dragged to "all men are rapists by default" - there is a high cost to curiosity today. Meanwhile, the company (facebook/twitter/google) takes it upon itself to recommend more and more videos on the subject, actively helping your descent into madness and delusion.
We have a sickness of the mind. 
I do not believe this to be an actual disorder in the psychological sense (though I wouldn't know it actually were). I do not think there has been a sudden change in our collective brain chemistry, I do not think this represents a new phase in human evolution, I do not believe this is God's punishment for our transgressions. I do believe we are exhibiting the same behavioral patterns as the Norwegian rats in Calhoun's experiments. 
I think we have a better chance of survival than the rats did. 

My personal hypothesis is as follows:

Our bodies evolved under specific conditions, to perform a specific set of tasks in a certain way. There is a correct way of running, for instance, and there are many incorrect ways that result in injury or even long-term damage. There is a correct way of lifting heavy weights, and many incorrect ways. Now if you were to lift a two-hundred kilogram weight in one of these 'incorrect' ways, and injure yourself, does it mean you were incapable of lifting the barbell, or just that you did it wrong? Every part of our body has a certain range of operability, and a specific sweet spot where it functions best. To maximize performance and minimize wear and tear, it is recommended to stay within these ranges. What is actually 'possible' is irrelevant; it is possible for my leg to bend backwards, but I'd need to break my knee first. For something to be 'possible', it merely needs to not violate the laws of our universe. 
I claim something similar is true of our brains and thought. I believe that there is a 'right' way to use one's brain that allows one to achieve atleast passable performance without the psychological wear and tear improper usage invariably occurs, and many, many 'wrong' ways that lead to psychological distress and damage. Further, I believe much of our apparent inability to deal with seemingly trivial problems, or even problems with straightforward solutions, is precisely because of this cerebral misuse. 

How do we arrive at this 'right way'? This question lies at the confluence of several of our oldest and finest mysteries- the explanatory gap, consciousness, the lack of any clear method to distinguish good from evil, and is therefore clearly worth pursuing. There may be several of these 'correct' ways, there may be none at all, and it may even be the case that my theory is nonsense. And then there is always the inescapable possibility - the rats never had a chance, and neither do we. Perhaps the best place to start would be at the windows through which we perceive the world - our senses. 

Disclaimer: As stated earlier, little research has gone into this book. If you find me claiming ideas that have existed for a while, it is out of ignorance. Plagiarism does not benefit me in any way.

Chapter 1.
Thoughts on reality.

I am an alien. I  am required to perform an assessment of all I can perceive with my unaided senses, and construct a consistent picture of my reality. Mysteriously, have a survival guide with all basic facts concerning the planet earth. 
I see trees, mountains, insects, animals. I see greens, blues, greys, whites, browns and blacks. 
I look up, and I see blue. I call it blue because I know that is what the colour is called, because the survival guide says so. I do not know what blue is supposed to be, except as what my eyes see when I look up at the sky. If there were other extraterrestrial toddlers around, we would all agree - the sky is indeed blue. But none of us would know what the others meant by blue, and none would know if what they see is what others see. 
Indeed, we cannot 'understand' our mental state, much less explain them to someone else and make them understand, once we move past the standards, the states we chose to name. Our shared language allows us to use certain words as being representative of specific ‘ideas’; when I say I am happy, I am referring to ‘some’ positive emotion that I enjoy, that I have been told is called happiness. I do not know if what happiness feels like to me, internally, is what it would feel like to anyone else. I do not, and cannot know, if my happiness 'feels' the same to me as yours does to you, or if the exact state I call happiness is what your brain happened to designate as misery.
This is a universal limit, and applies to, without exception, every single internal experience. All the things we feel, we are either doomed to hold it in, unable to understand, express or explain meaningfully, or have placeholder names that are supposed to provide a general reference to the idea of an emotional state, but say nothing about what this experience 'feels like' internaly. Try describing right and left without using the words right and left, or describing the taste of salt without using the word salty, or rage, sorrow, love..the best we can do is describe the circumstances and the physiological effects, but the state itself is beyond description. 
I do not know why this is. It does make some vague sense, like trying to make a mirror cast its own reflection. 


