Foreward.

When I first read about John B Calhoun's rat utopia experiments, my first thought was "Surely, we cannot be this predictable?" But every year since then, has only cemented my opinion of the experiment: as it stands, it forms 
a direct paral el with our own state as a species. There are certainly valid reasons to disagree with this comparision - for on , humans are not rats. But to my inexperienced and ill-educated eyes, these are just nitpicks; I 
can understand the automatic urge to r ject the idea that at the end of the day, we will die out exactly like rats in a perfect pen, and I can even respect the particular, nuanced reasons this is not a good or fair 
comparision. But. There are undeniable parallels. Now, whether the story of the experiment can serve as a direct prophecy for our own ultimate fate, is an open question, but in my view, irrelevant. What is important is that 
there is sufficient non-trivial correspondence between the Norway rats in Calhoun's enclosure, and homo sapiens in our own, and that there is some valuable idea that can be sucked out of it. To be sure, the applicability of 
his experiments on humanity have been questioned, and his interpretations of his results have been criticized, but if it helps, you are free to consider it a pure fabrication - the ideas held within the story function just as 
well with a fictonal account. In any case, if you have not heard of this experiment, here is a summary.


An enclosure for Norway rats was built. They were supplied with unlimited food and water. It was expected that given no obvious impediments to their growth, the population would keep growing into the th usands over the course 
of about two years. Instead, across iterations, the experiment would invariably end with he opposite: the mice would breed rapidly initially, but soon the population would level off, then following by he rats breaking up into 
small cliques comprising of a dozen or so individuals; individual rats would develop ho tile, anti-social and sedentary habits, and eventually, the population would die out entirely. Among those iterations, was Universe 25. 
It had a nearly three square-meter enclosure, consisting of four pens w th two hundred and fifty-six living compartments, and sixteen burrows leading to abundant food and water supplies. Each living compartment could house up 
to fifteen individual rats, with an overall capacity of three thousand. A clean, comfortable enclosure with an endless supply of food and water, with no diseases or predators around, w s as close to luxury as a rat could ever 
get. Into this paradise, the experiment began with four pairs of health mice. The first hundred or so days were spent acclimating to their new surroundings, marking territory, and nes ing. Soon after, the rats began taking 
advantage of their resources, and breeding rapidly, with the population d ubling every two months. By the end of about a year, the enclosure contained over six hundred mice. And then bea n their decline. The number of rats at 
this point was about a fifth of what the enclosure could hold. And yet, m st rats seemed to prefer crowding in specific areas, sharing the same food sources. This constant huddling soon ave way to a decline in mating 
activity, with the birth rate falling to about a third of its original level. Of he rats in the enclosure at this point, a third emerged as socially dominant, with the other two-thirds showing arked decline in social skills 
and status. Behavioral disparities among males of different social stature became more marked. Those individuals at the bottom of the social order found themselves spurned by females, and eventu lly abandoned trying to mate 
altogether. With no need to hunt and no mate, these rats had no function with their society. These outcasts would soon peel off the group entirely, eating and sleeping on their own, or fighting wi h other outcasts. The 
dominant males on the other hand, became more aggressive, often needlessly so, violently a tacking other individuals with no provocation or motive, indiscriminately raping other rats - irrespective of th ir sex. Most other 
males that comprised the middle of the social order, grew timid and passive, accepting violen attacks without protests, often dying in the process, even being cannibalized in several instances. With the ma es having abandoned 
(or been deprived of) their social functions, females were left to adopt male roles during t e rearing of pups. Consequently, some adopted more aggressive behaviour, with their own young being the victims of this frequently. 
Others shirked their own functions as well, abandoning their own litter and withdrawing from mating activities. Infant mortality reached nearly ninety percent. About a year and a half into the experiment, the population 
started to decline. Infant mortality was now about a hundred percent. From these circumstances rose another social group, the rats that had reached maturity but had rown up in extremely dysfunctional circumstances, and 
indeed, had never been exposed to a normal society with he lthy relationships. With no concept of, and interest in _normal_ social activities and interactions like mating r marking territory, this group spent all their waking 
time eating, drinking, and grooming themselves. These _be utiful ones_ as Calhoun called them, lived in seclusion. They avoided the anarchic social conditions by rejectin society itself. With every fundamental motivation that 
drives life having made irrelevant, no need to establish a territory or f nd a mate or raise young or hunt for food, these individuals found themselves in a society that had no need for hem. Individuals were reduced to 
aimless, self-absorbed entities that did nothing, for there was nothing to do. The population eventually died out entirely.  Calhoun called this the second death _ the first was, in his view, the beginning of the end, the 
complete loss of purpose in the rats_ lives. He attempted to salvage this implosio by placing some of the _beautiful ones_ into new enclosures that had not fallen to the anarchic conditions of t eir own, hoping the change in 
circumstances might wake them from their anti-social catatonia. He failed. The rat simply would not change their behaviour. They eventually died out of natural causes, alone. Universe 25 peaked at 2200 rats. None of them 
survived.

The applicability of the above results as an unnervingly accurate metaphor for our own current state is obvious indeed, the only danger here is as usual, over-interpretation of simpel facts. After all, though world today re 
sembles Calhoun's rat utopia, we are not rats, and it seems we may have more agency over our own fate than rats. Whether that will make a difference at all remains to be seen. I do not believe it does; studying rats and their 
behaviour allows us a ertain objectivity we cannot muster when studying ourselves, and anyway, your view will depend on whether you see the rats as sentient beings with their own will and volition, or as a lower being that 
functions like an automa on, being driven to do things its wiring will permit it to, and nothing else, that is, whether the collapse of the rat utopia was simply the inevitable consequence of the combination of their own 
nature and the circumstances they were put in, or result of their own deliberate choices. But at the end of the day, even in humans, whether the specific choices made were deliberate, or a consequence of our wiring, is 
 irrelevant; extinction works just as well without free will. This story should serve as the background noise while you read the rest of the book.


________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Introduction

This book is a collection of my ideas on subjects I find interesting.
I want to explain why I am writing this book, but I am not a very good writer. 
Let us start with our PRoblems. Consider the claim: Nearly all 
The primary purpose behind this pointless undertaking is the consensus that misinformation, junk science, combined with an aggressive will to believe in ideas for the sole purpose of pissing off political opponents, has resulted in such a noisy, cacophonous view of the world that most of us are burnt out by noon. As I will describe later on, 'humans are creatures of habit' is not merely a pithy aphorism; we have evolved with predictability being the primary metric. Every sense we possess, and every instinct we act and react on, either serves to make our immediate surroundings or our own selves more predictable, or serves to makes us act in a way that does. This is a strange claim, but now is not the time for an explanation. The point is, the simple state of being constantly exposed to two equally convincing political philosophiesas, ovand left us absolutely unable to discern truth from fiction.

I disagree. Finding truth may be difficult, but spotting nonsense is always easier; the insistence otherwise is just self-consoling behavior - who wants to admit they are too stupid to spot a silly fabrication online? Surely, it must be an unbelievably sophisticated deception, funded by the bottomless treasure-chests of nation-states, subtle, nuanced, convoluted, a part of one conspiracy or the other, all for the express purpose of mind-control. Otherwise there is simply no way we could be fooled. 
Obviously, that is nonsense. Our circumstances vis-a-vis (mis)information is a logical conclusion to centuries of deliberate, methodical suspension of disbelief, formal systems designed to dodge uncomfortable or inconvenient truths, and an inexplicable insistence on 'obedience'. Every effort we have made through history to deliberately suppress obvious facts, or deliberately promulgate obvious lies, with promise of eternal bliss and threats of eternal suffering, has 'trained' us in a way - ask yourself not why flat-earthers believe there is a global conspiracy to hide the shape of the earth, not why they go past the conspiracy into making such an easily falsifiable claim, nor why they insist on its truth inspite of being shown direct evidence otherwise. The only question that really matters is, at the precise moment when the shape of the earth in their mind went from spheroidal to flat, how did they convince themselves? And asking this question makes the core issue quite clear; defensive arguments in a scientific confrontation aside, assuming only that people generally WANT to be correct, the fundamental problem here is the inability to make a correct judgement based on an easily observable facts.
In other words, I claim that generally, we have forgotten how to process information. Note that I say forgotten - the ease with which a person can be convinced that a fabricated statement is truth, increases with age, as the habit of formal learning atrophies. Our education places significant focus on information, which is misguided to begin with: the focus should always have been in teaching the 'ability' to learn, the ability to process information accurately, avoiding bad arguments, and maximizing one's chances of avoiding incorrect conclusions. 
However, this is not how it is done. It is not sufficient to merely learn information, whether of theory and practice, because all information that is relevant to an education is ultimately fluid. New discoveries are made, new inventions are birthed, mistakes are corrected. It makes no sense to build a foundation on a snapshot of knowledge, unless this is supplemented with the ability to account for, accomodate, and adapt to inevitably regular. Information without a robust framework to process, interpret and make correct judgements, is absolutely meaningless. To be clear, this is not an automatic, or natural development; evolution has made us capable of unbelievable achievement, but this capability must be actively developed, without which we are simply letting the hardware behave as it wants to. And what the hardware wants is to generally conserve energy, and when needed, perform the basic involuntary reactions of emotional responses to stimuli. This is without question purely made up, but I find changing the way in which one views onself, including mental models of how one generally 'functions', makes dramatic changes in outlook and quality of life.

Here is a list of things I must declare before this goes any further.

1. I haven't yet recalled a collective term for _all_ the problems we face as a species. There is a consistency in our inability to solve problems that affect large numbers of people that has plagued us throughout our existence and is important enough to warrant an honest discussion, especially considering how so many of them seem to have melted into each other, creating an obscene monstrosity of interlinked crises like a mat of hair stuck to soap, leaving more and more simply unable to cope. I shall merely refer to them as PRoblems, with a capital P and R. PRoblems includes, but is not limited to: war, disease, poverty, climate change, pedophilia, rape, bigotry, plastic, partisan politics, idiotic politicians, idiotic politics, retarded policies, idiotic groups of people, flat earthers, anti-abortioners, religion, species going extinct, the lack of decent alternatives to plastic, animal abuse, traditional Chinese medicine, people who have more than two children , the ever increasing history syllabus for schoolchildren, creationists, people who leave toilet paper on the seat, cheap voters, competitive victimhood, mental illness, menstrual cramps, social media, dying arts, dying languages, dying cultures, superstition, crop failures, the carbon footprint of "Content", et cetera. PRoblems.

2. Very little research has gone into this book. One of the underlining motivations for this monumental undertaking is the fact that growing percentage of PRoblems requires expert views from experts, with the emphatic message being that because said PRoblems are so complex, and require such care and rigor in its study and ultimate solution, that the average plebian simply cannot be allowed opinions on the subject. 
This is not entirely without reason; for every significant globally relevant problem, there are multiple groups, often including some very powerful people, who believe the problem itself is an artificial construction by Some Powerful Group to achieve various ends, usually mind control and total subjugation of the populace; clearly, no good can come of letting them speak.
However, beyond the dubious moral worth of cosmetic adjustments to social discourse, restricting expression does absolutely nothing to the offending ideas and ideologies being suppressed, nor to the people espousing them. In fact, it is more likely to have the opposite effect, either with groups digging in their heels, holding on to said ideas purely out of spite, or building their own environments (whether physical or digital) dedicated to allow free expression of only the most vile ideologies that are prohibited in polite society. What follows then and forms the 'norm' within such ideological enclosures, is participants discovering, and then learning to enjoy, a sort of 'unshackling' of their minds long kept weighed down and in chains by a society that is simply too stupid to recognize the wisdom held in their ideology, and as they take their first baby steps into finally letting the imp say what it always wanted to, feel the sublime, corrosive joy jumping off the cliffs of Dover might feel like
I ask you: what is this supposed to achieve, exactly? What needs to be solved here, clearly, is not the expression or promulgation of these ideas, but the fact that so many people find these ideas attractive in the first place. There is an underlying trait that is common to racists, bigots, conspiracy theorists and religious people - perhaps common to all of us to various extents - the willingness to be convinced by ideas, to take suggestions as fact, for little reason beyond blind faith in ones own side, and unbridled contempt for the opponent.

3. In spite of a general belief that our PRoblems are extremely complex, or even require prolonged periods of academic study and consequently require similar study to have a qualified opinion at all, I believe it is absolutelypossible, and in fact easy, to atleast avoid being incorrect - if not exactly correct in the way social discourse around our Problems is undertaken. As part of this demonstration, I begin with a deliberate informational handicap - and this means no research. I will write with exactly what I already know, the qualifications I possess and the experience I have, and no more. I do not know yet how this will turn out, we will see. If there is a convincing case that the opposite is true, we will have confirmed our ultimate fate (death by being slowly cooked and seasoned with poisonous air), in which case the best approach to life would be to abandon all ideological baggage, and submerge oneself into unbridled decadence, with a sense of well-mannered anarchy. Anyway, I feel comfortable with this approach because worse books have been written. 

4. I treat these pages as something between an indifferent bartender and a confession box. Further, I will be under the influence of various hallucinogens and stimulants throughout the course of this book. This means long, winding digressions in pursuit of some silly thread of an idea, but also shifts in mood, tone, and style, depending on the chemical effects my brain is experiencing in that moment. While this goes against every style-guide in existence, one, I do not care if anyone reads this at all, and two, this is how people function in real life, our moods, thought processes and interactions being influenced by everything we put inside us, everything that surrounds us, so we are slightly different people each day. Consequently, large sections of this book will be stupid, incorrect, offensive, and generally infuriating.

5. Correctness is not the goal. Instead, the primary strategy will involve following threads of ideas, trying to minimize incorrectness locally, and see where things go. This is an important distinction. As a simple example, consider the statements 
    1. Barack Obama has the best back-of-the-head of all American presidents. 
    2. Barack Obama is a professional American. 
The former could be "true" (I personally believe it is), but it is ultimately a matter of opinion. It doesn't matter how objective any analysis that proves statement 1 is, because the only counter it needs is "I disagree". On the other hand, the second statement is clearly factually incorrect, because being American is not a profession. However, that is also not the point of the statement, and any casual reader will likely see that, so it is not exactly incorrect either. Where statement 1 could be true but also not true depending on who you asked, statement 2 has a finite and forgiveable amount of disagreement with reality. So we will follow statement 2, taking it to mean exactly what it says.

5. This book is not any of the following:
    - A new hypothesis/theory about anything.
    - A claim of having solved our Problems.
    - A claim of having solutions to our Problems.
    - A claim of having access to information others do not.
    - A claim of having had insights others have not.

Do not read this book. 

_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Chapter 1.

Getting started.

Here is a question. What is stopping countries from agreeing on real action against climate change? 

Resist any responsese forming in your mind, that begin with "it is an extremely complex question, with innumerable variables", and try to get to the heart of the question, which is as follows:

Given a global consensus (however misguided it may be in your view) among scientists and professionals, that the cumulative effects of industrialization and 'progress' over the past few centuries has put us on a straight and 
narrow path to catastrophic (and ongoing) deterioration of the environment, that is guaranteed to end with our own extinction, unless we take immediate and severe measures to fundamentally change "the way we do business" as 
humans - why are governments so stubbornly unwilling to move an inch beyond banal trumpery, even for reasons as pedestrian as the preference for a clean, green world bursting with life as your preferred God intended, over the 
gray, smoky empires of concrete, craft beer and mental illness we live in today?
I grew up in a place situated within a rainforest; much of the area adjacent to the colony is now a tiger reserve. My first memories are of the stream behind my house, barely two feet across, but crystal clear water, ferns 
and mosses and lichen of untold age grown in solid mats along it. Where an average child today stares at a spinning toy until they fall asleep, I saw birds, animals, insects, none of which I could name; a leopard on a tree, 
elephants crossing the road to the town, a sudden dash of yellow and black far in the jungle, or was it just my imagination? I did go back a few years ago, after nearly 25 years of brief stays in various places each of which 
I liked less than the last, an unbelievable mix of potent emotions and events swimming in my head, from nostalgia, to trepidation, to the growling voice in my mind warning me against getting too hopeful. There was no stream. 
The mosses and ferns around it were gone, as was the jungle around them. This confused me for a brief moment; My memories of that place are all lush green and smell of rain, and dull green and brown during dry summers, but 
here was just bare rock, covered by what patches of soil the dead grass was still holding together.
I spent several days there. I remember the wildlife I saw in my childhood (things that blow a childs mind, especially things they have no evidence for, do not get forgotten), and I hoped I would finally identify a few of them 
with my adult intelligence and internet access, but I could find none. I could not even find a patch of land around my old home that looked like it could harbor life. I know atleast a few insects, maybe a bird or two, have 
vanished entirely. Was I the last to see one of those nameless extinct species? Was I the only one to notice them in that sleepy town where the jungle was not something special to be admired or studied, but merely a part of 
the background like the sky and the river? Was any of the life I was so fascinated by in my childhood, the last of its kind, the only interaction its species had ever had with a human being an uneventful encounter with a 
little boy transfixed by its mere existence? While I stood hypnotized by the deafening cacophony of every creature that lived in the jungle and could make a sound launching into tweets and screams and buzzes and flaps and 
barks and whines and squeals and rasps..was there the last of a nameless creature, roaming around, singing its pitiful song, hoping to attract a mate that will never come? The beetles under the bark, that kept peeling off and 
collecting in the little pockets where the branches meet the trunk, mixed with rain and birdshit and dead mosses and leaves, slowly turning into the most pristine soil imaginable, until a seed from entirely different species 
takes root in that little bit of soil, ferns and mosses on trees on trees, insects under the bark, in the heartwood, birds all over the canopy...a tree in a jungle is not just a tree.
The point is, there is clear bias here, and I accept it. Humans typically do not appreciate things they have not had a chance to enjoy first, because that would make no sense. So I do understand not only why not everyone is passionate about nature, but also that indifference to 'nature' is a normal and rational response, the only one in the absence of any exposure of 'nature' that one might appreciate. Attenborough tried, but it just isn't the same.
In any case, my personal bias notwithstanding, I can see absolutely no downside to preserving nature and species. Even beyond the merely sentimental reasons, there is a practical utilitarian benefit - our lives depend on the ecosystems that support us. This is not a matter of debate; as ecosystems collapse, so will we. One could comfortably take the most selfish position - pure personal benefit - and realize that food, water and air that will not give them cancer is worth any money one might lose. Put simply, I cannot even think of a silly reason not to protect nature and ecosystems. And therein lies the problem - protecting ecosystems is not nearly as urgent an issue as climate change is. It is true species are dropping off the roster every other day, but any species that has gone extinct actually has been beyond saving the day its population fell below the minimum viable population for that species. 
Climate change on the other hand, was absolutely fixable when it first gained prominence in scientific and public discourse. And each generation born since, has watched much of the same laziness and stubbornly brainless ideologies about climate-change conspiracies enter government, and each generation has opened its eyes to a planet worse in practically every measurable globally-significant aspect. We watched as the easily fixable problem of the past, minute by minute, hour by hour, day by day, decade by decade, turned into a slightly tricky problem, then little by little, and then all at once, a very real existential crisis. 

It does not matter what one thinks of the factual accuracy of the statements of climate change. If one believes building a bunker to shelter in in the unlikely event of a global nuclear war is a wise decision, or following one's chosen (or imposed) religion's tenets and commandments in order to avoid some kind of eternal hell is a good idea, it is obviously well-understood that it is sometimes better accept temporary inconvenience and transient costs in order to prepare for a problem before it becomes a crisis. the exact same arguments apply to climate change, but because the right people in the right positions are not making the right arguments, we find ourselves unable to agree on what can be quite easily read and understood by most people. can be easily applied to climate change with the same argument. It is strange there is such a significant overlap between bunker-builders and climate change deniers.

Now. It.., I would imagine it should take some very strong and convincing reasons to reject the idea altogether as so many seem to with such ease. In fact, it is interesting to note that there is a fairly significant overlap between religious people and climate-change-deniers, because it is clearly not a matter of ability - a religious person can indeed accept otherwise unbelievable ideas based simply on a vague promise of heaven or a vague threat of hell. And yet, cleaning up the environment is where we draw the line. It should be axiomatic that food without bits of plastic in it is worse than food with bits of plastic in it; one should not need an explanation to accept that air without cancer-causing pollutants is better than air with cancer-causing pollutants, or that water without industrial chemicals is worse than water with industrial chemicals in it. One should not need a debate to settle whether dumping untreated effluents into the open ocean, and having those same chemicals end up back on our plates with the fish we caught there, is bad, or just a conspiracy to ruin the otherwise unstoppable suns of pure nuclear joy that our lives are in one way or another., resources, food, water and air, especially considering the fact that cleaning up the environment is all benefits and no loss, irrespective of whether it results in 'saving humanity' or not, why are we more interested in practically every other trivial issue we can think of, than in ensuring our own long term survival?

It 
Simultaneously, the most 'socially conscious' ones among us, the ones who have nobly accepted the thankless, backbreaking responsbility of leading humanity towards the light, a world where we can all be as we want to be, love who we want, live how we want, and preferably one where some sort of steady passive income has already been granted so they can focus their faculties on more important problems, are also some of the most active users of social media, with followers in the millions, gladly sucking in the pearls of 144-character wisdom that is periodically gifted ... what exactly is the carbon footprint of this inconsequential nonsense? How much energy do those 'inspirational quotes' cost to create, store, replicate, reproduce, and serve across the world, especially considering inspiration seems to be more reliably available when the quote is pasted onto a scenery and the whole thing turned into an image?

In short, what is the carbon footprint of "Content"?

In any discussion on climate change, when it comes to listing candidates for the first lynchings when things kick off for real, crude oil companies and their entire leadership are easy and obvious choices, in fact, among the best places to start from.  

Family fued is a curious show without comparable peers; in a way it is an anti show; where most game shows focus on winning based on the player's competence, intelligence, strength, over the opponent, this specifically requires the player to abandon ANYTHING that would set their own thoughtprocess apart from the rest, you win if you are part of the majority.

"Smart" is irrelevant if it isn't well-funded.

Elon musk is frequently referred to as a genius. He killed your favourite bird, and aptly named it X.

It is fine to talk of gods and the meaning of life, but if you cannot know whether or not either of those really exists, perhaps it is better to embrace life and our tiny place in the universe, and all the pointlessness and 
banality a human lifetime involves. We can choose to respect laws and constitutions, culture, religion, gods, powerful people - but it is always a choice, and we can choose not to. We can choose to invent convoluted ways and analogies involving animals to find some meaningful lesson, some instruction, some clue about the point of it all, but we can choose not to. In our obsessive search for meaning, with the stupid hubris of a creature that thinks the universe exists for it, that there is a larger cosmic plan for it preordained - we have locked ourselves into fantastical imaginations and obsessive attachments to vapid constructions that just do not exist. Where is heaven, and where is hell? What does it matter if one cannot choose, and what does it matter if neither pleasure nor pain actually starts at heaven and hell - there is plenty of both right here, on our stupid little planet. It is only when one relieves themselves of this duty of obedience to gods made up by people who died centuries ago, that one truly finds one place in the universe - right here on this shithole planet. There is no afterlife, no heaven or hell; what happens after death is what happened to you before you were born. This is all there is. We are not going to mars, nor are our grandchildren. We will not change our behavior. We will continue to pollute and destroy. We will perish from the effects of climate change. Societies will get more and more disordered as more and more of our problems go away; like the rats in their utopia, we will die away.
Unless we change things. But we won't. The rats didn't.


Jorpes have a crucial quality: they have a worldview and a sense of self that has been ossifying unchallenged for decades. Frequently, this is supplemented with the assumption that everyone around them agrees, or would simply agree if they could understand his side the way they intend it, because one would have to be insane to disagree with the gemstone that their philosophy is. Challenges are not taken well, and can lead to mild distress to nervous breakdowns.

If you read the whole thing, thank you, it couldn't have been easy. I want to end with something positive, so here it is: if you ever find yourself in need of inspiration, meet the dogs of Chernobyl. Chernobyl is no dream destination, even for the most downtrodden creature, but somehow, plants, peace, and a few good friends are all one really needs to thrive. The absence of "people" probably helps too.
