Utopia.


Introduction.

This book is a collection of my ideas and opinions in no particular order and no consistent style. There is some hope of this turning into a collection of essays, which would be the best possible outcome, but it is just as 
likely to be an unhinged rant. Over the past decade, I have developed a deep passive fascination for ideologies, and the frustrating pervasiveness of the myriad assumptions that we live with and within, in order to function 
as a society. There is a general consensus that every single human born within a society exists only within the philosophical, moral and cultural forests surrounding their lives, and this is so deep rooted that most of us 
never even realize it, and therefore have no chance of ever escaping it. In other words, whatever your position on the nature vs nurture debate surrounding our habits and identities, the fact that our identities only form and 
survive functionally ‘well’ within very narrow specifications for a healthy ‘nature’ and a healthy ‘nurture’, reveals the inescapable fact that any attempt at constructing one’s identity, philosophy and worldview in complete 
isolation, without the intellectual trellis that local society and its customs provide, is almost certainly doomed to a terrible failure. This sounds like an interesting challenge to me. Given my own unremarkable life, and 
the fact that I have practically been cooked in several distinct such cultures, and therefore well exposed to the contradictions within themselves and across each other, is it possible to ‘shake off’ this foundation in its 
weakened state and try to engineer the same set of ‘results’, whether cultural, moral, social or intellectual, without the use of these starting assumptions? Can we simplify and oversimplify the issues we like to think are 
complex, and can we show these apparent complexity is more a product of our inexplicable need to believe something we cannot immediately achieve or understand as being complex, rather than of our own (current) incompetence?

There is a certain strain of modern popular intellectuals who are also firm believers in not only the truth, but the necessity of the judeo-christian canon of religion and spirituality in order for the world, or atleast the 
western world, to have any hope at stability. They insist that to not believe in a divine pronouncement of the moral code we must hold ourselves to, is to have none at all. How can one test this? Discovering a non-trivial 
counterexample would be decisive in the evaluation of this claim. One of my goals through this book is to find counterexamples to what is considered ‘common wisdom’. These counter-examples may be invalid, and any 
counter-arguments may be total nonsense; the aim is to free ourselves, and practice deliberately considering opinions that we believe to be incorrect. Additionally, this is not meant to be an indictment of said ‘common 
wisdom’ (although if it ended up being so, I wouldn’t care), but to consider the consequences of simply abandoning these tenets. I have always held an intense contempt for the aspiration of eternal incremental improvements. 
For a building to be structurally sound, it needs to have in the right places and the right arrangement, all the components that can contribute to its structural strength. One might certainly add on random reinforcements in 
random places, and these reinforcements may actually improve the overall strength of the structure or its resistance to whatever measure of damage. On the other hand, if these reinforcements are added in places where they 
cannot have any contribution to the structure, obviously, they will make no difference. Further, if one were to add floors to this structure, basing the design decisions on the structure or reinforcements added to the lower 
floors, one risks the entire structure collapsing if these reinforcements were in these inconsequential locations. Finally, the structure might seem, and indeed be completely and demonstrably stable until a particular 
critical structure is placed in a particular critical location, meaning every subsequent addition does indeed require (if starting without any assumptions of the correctness of decisions taken so far) an evaluation of not 
just the addition, but of the overall structure and all its components assuming the new addition. If it wasn’t obvious, the previous paragraph was a roundabout metaphor for the idea that it is impossible for an entity, 
whether a person, organization, society, nation, or our entire species, to continuously improve by building upon previous developments without ever considering alternate, simpler paths from some previous position that would 
lead us to the same destination. This not only has the potential to make our endeavors significantly easier, but also, basing any development upon a previous idea that depended on a lack of information for its acceptability 
leaves the entire collective enterprise at risk of collapse. To that end, at some point, if we are to have any realistic expectations of ever reaching the goal of world peace, happiness and prosperity, someone must reevaluate 
our progress within the context of our entire existence, how our own local plans affect our chances of reaching this goal, and an honest accounting of all the useless baggage we insist on carrying. This ‘baggage’ is 
essentially any narrative that we take seriously, that is not directly and demonstrably true. This does not discount the importance of a certain amount of luggage; our path only makes sense within the context of all the 
choices that the people before us made, and depending on the seriousness of the mistake in one of these choices, we could either be just one correction away from reaching our goal, or we could be so far off the track that we 
now have no hope of ever reaching there. This is not a trivial problem, and moreover, is starting to rear its ugly head across several of our collective projects. For instance, there is a growing body of scientists that have 
accused cutting edge theoretical physics to be growing overconfident in the truth of theories about areas of physics that are so fantastical and untestable, that for all intents and purposes are nothing beyond reasoned 
speculation. This does not mean they are wrong - it just means that we have allowed ourselves to grow more and more lenient with our system of evaluating the validity of ideas. Generally, speaking, this is an inevitable 
consequence of not making deliberate attempts to ‘reset’ our trajectories as a species; development of any intellectual enterprise is impossible without also including a regimen of reevaluating ‘past wisdom’ given the light 
of current and demonstrable knowledge- cleaning up our books, so to speak. To conclude, I will attempt to examine some issues I find interesting, and discuss why certain aspects of commonly accepted wisdom simply cannot be 
true, and to recommend changes to our internal algorithms to make life easier for all of us. This is obviously no simple task. Anyone choosing to embark on this noble, but ultimately futile crusade, risks, without 
exaggeration, everything from social ostracization to death by lynch mob. So any candidate must at least be brave enough to attempt it, and competent enough to make any progress at all before the highly likely event of an 
unnatural death. I am a perfectly average guy. I am not rich by any means, but I can shop for my groceries without looking at the price tags. I am not an expert at anything, but I know just enough to have a very good estimate 
of how much I do not know. I am frequently wrong, but I also care enough to have good, logical reasons for holding these incorrect opinions, and try my best to correct myself. I believe in good and evil, but I know those are 
simply a matter of democratic opinion, which are, in a cosmic sense, arbitrary. Most importantly, I do not like life. I have found it to be completely unnecessary suffering in the pursuit of ultimately meaningless goals. It 
is also my life, and because I find this party to consist of too many morons, I shall leave if I want to, when I want to, in the way that I want to. We are far too overstocked on ourselves anyway. Martyrdom at the hands of an 
evil government is attractive, but so is a death at the hands of a few idiots that goes completely unnoticed - I like these manifestations of the futility of the human project, and the indifference of the universe to our 
sacred values; few things are more satisfyingly grand than the universe flipping us off. I am a man of very limited capacity, so I would recommend tempered expectations from the rest of this book. Importantly, note that this 
is far too much work, especially for me, and if you are holding this book in your hand, know that it took uncharacteristic levels of effort on my part to finish this. Every time I look at the world and everything in it, where 
there used to be love in my childhood, fear in my teens and dread in my early adulthood, is blissful nothingness. If a nuclear war were to break out tomorrow, I would feel nothing. There really is no point in torturing 
oneself with a sense of responsibility if one has no real control. The way I see it, nothing in the world today works the way it should. Democracy has scaled terribly, and is failing across the world. All of big tech is 
essentially one global project to torture me with advertisements; social media is anything but social, the average person gets less and less out of life with each generation, and as a species we have apparently agreed to go 
back to prioritizing emotional responses over truth, characteristic of most animals. There is also a growing anger against the incessant broadcasting of opinions. The problems that affect us absolutely require everyone to 
agree on any potential solution, but individual opinions or minor disagreements are of little importance over the scale of our collective existence. This is especially true when the publicizing of these opinions carries an 
inherent pressure to comply with the prevailing opinion, whether correct or incorrect, which is worrying considering the quality of these opinions. Anyone can have a great and groundbreaking realization, and everyone is 
equally deserving of dignity, respect and the right to seek happiness in any manner that does not directly affect anyone else; but most opinions are nonsense. I say this accepting that this entire book has an equal likelihood 
of being the harbinger of a great new chapter in our approach to ourselves, or something unspeakably, criminally terrible , or something so entirely bereft of qualities that no one even cares enough to have an opinion on it. 
In an all too expected turn of fortune, our mindless attempt at inviting ‘open communication’ across the world has resulted not just in the thinning and the nearly incumbent vanishing of the line between a layman and a 
qualified expert (because the selection to local or global prominence is based on entertainment value, not competence), but also the more serious problem of people actually believing qualified and unqualified views are 
equally valid - at some point in recent history we made the mistake of thinking opening discussions on complex issues with far reaching consequences to a democratic process that places no importance on education or 
qualification, was a good idea. But irrespective of your own opinion on the idea of social media, surely we can all agree that it is completely unnecessary to try to publicize one’s meal, for instance. We forget that every 
reenactment of a tiktok trend, every passionate tweet, and really every contribution of persistent information to the digital domain gets stored somewhere, and this addition costs money and energy; the global internet is a 
massively complex and intricate entity, with a carbon footprint of (at the time of writing of the first article I found when I googled this) 4% of the global carbon emissions, increasing by 5 to 7% every year. Every snap, 
tweet, call, text, vlog, that is accessible over the internet has an indirect but non-zero contribution to the deterioration of our environment, and we really should consider, even if occasionally, the damage the sheer volume 
of our pointless attempts at popularity cause to the planet, and if it indeed was worth making your last post on your platform of choice. This is not a matter of rights or liberty, but of pragmatism and environmental 
consciousness. Anyway, my point was, given this apparent ambivalence to the quality of opinions that can get a platform and a decent chance at fame, I feel comfortable with this endeavor. I claim that using a simple framework 
for looking at the world that I shall describe later, one actually does not need any expertise to achieve our collective goals; in my experience, the single quality that is critical to a successful intellectual project is not 
intelligence, or education, or qualifications, but honesty. In case the book is not received well, I will bury a few copies of this book in bunkers in secret locations just so people from the next century will have something 
to dig up.

I had a pretty decent childhood, barring the occasional physical beatings from my parents; this is still quite usual in most of the world. As I grew up, I watched in shock as layers upon layers of bullshit I was fed over my 
childhood started to fall away, from faith and religion to homeopathy and ‘positive energies’, to the less obvious ones like rights, liberty, and democracy. While I’d like to think I came to this realization on my own, my 
education most likely had a lot to do with it.

One of our worst habits in the current era is the ease with which we forget the reasons for decisions made in the past. As I wrote earlier, it is of critical importance to reevaluate our past decisions, and judge them not 
just by our local set of metrics but also the metrics at the time of judgment, and their validity within the overall landscape of our ideology. However, this cannot possibly happen without understanding the reasons behind 
past decisions before we discard them. Most of our past behavior feels reprehensible in retrospect, but the difference between stupidity and malice is often just the reasons. In addition, these reasons themselves often reveal 
human needs that may not be immediately obvious, but nevertheless underpin our fundamental definitions of what is desirable and what is not desirable, and it is important to understand the reasons and determining the 
alternate means of satisfying the needs that led to those reasons being considered important at the time, and realizing that sometimes, these may be absolute needs for atleast some of us. People misunderstand the point of 
education, or the topics covered in standard school curricula these days. Note that I am only referring to schools - colleges and universities currently walk a thin line between advanced study and naked profiteering, and 
that’s a discussion for another time. “I am never going to need to compute the change in temperature of an ideal gas given a change in pressure, so why aren’t I taught how to do my taxes instead of filling my head with this 
pointlessness”. There is a certain logic here to be acknowledged, but it is important to realize before we learn specific skills that will be directly useful in our lives, we must learn the prerequisite skill of being able to 
learn in the first place. This is not a matter of nature- learning is a habit, even if the basic biological infrastructure that allows us to learn at all is mostly common. The problem thus becomes not one of critical thinking 
or intellectual honesty, but the primary ability to learn, and to learn the right way of thinking and processing information. School education is critical, not for learning itself, but for the specific and criminally 
underappreciated skill of learning. This is why I have a strong contempt to play with curricula over ideological reasons - there is a very serious risk of placing a critical handicap on generations of children. Of course, I 
have no evidence to support this, and I don't even know if any evidence even exists, or even if this idea is correct. But there are a few personal observations I rely on to come to this conclusion - 1. the vast majority of 
working professionals have absolutely no use for what they learnt in school 2. The vast majority of people simply forget everything they learnt in a school year once they’ve written their exams for the year 3. Consistently 
bad performance in school is a great indicator of career progression later in life. As usual, this is not a law of nature, and there are always inspiring exceptions of college dropouts that founded the most valuable companies 
in human history, or people discovered a secret passion or talent that transformed their lives, but it is important to recognize that these are exceptions to the rule, and thinking “if they can do it, so can I” for any of 
these examples is offensive to the idea of probability. It is indeed possible any one of us could build the next trillion-dollar company, and any one of us could be the next greatest guitarist in the world - but nearly all of 
us will fail, and fail miserably. I should clarify that the reasons have absolutely nothing to do with ‘talent’. The problem is any skill, or the skill of gaining skills, is fundamentally contradictory to our hard-wired 
compulsion to seek comfort. Most of us simply are not capable of enduring the horrible boredom that learning comes with, especially because being an expert requires the endurance of an incredible amount of fear, misery, self 
doubt, anxiety and boredom. Simply put, most of us are simply too lazy. But our ambitions remain. There is an undertone of this unbridled moon-eyed optimism that underpins some of the angriest societies today - even if caked 
over with discontent and disappointment spanning generations.

Now I don’t like saying this, but it must be said. You are allowed to not read this book. You are allowed to stop reading the book at any moment you want to. I do not want to offend you, and I am declaring there will be 
offensive ideas in this book, so proceed at your own risk. To help with this, I will also try my best to leave nothing open to interpretation. Everything I want to say, I will say, especially because I will be touching on 
certain topics that I dare not be ambiguous around. So do not try to read between the lines; there will be no secret interpretations to draw out. I will be straightforward, please read what is written and just that. I will 
not be blamed for what you believe I mean, and I will not argue about something I have not said. Unfortunately, because my knowledge of the current world is broad but extremely shallow, I will sometimes be incorrect about my 
usage of certain words and phrases - in these cases, I hope you will understand that it is just my ignorance, and I have no special aspiration to be incorrect. While conflict is often inevitable, it is always annoying and 
takes way too long to end, so I’d rather just avoid it altogether. If you are the sort of person that believes you being offended by something I have written is a serious problem at all, please put this book down and let us 
part as friends. If you continue to read, try and see the point I am trying to make rather than the things I am saying or the words I am using. I know it is my basic responsibility as the writer to make sure you understand 
what I am trying to say, but I do not see a way to achieve this without expending significant time and effort, and I don’t want to do that.

While there are specific ideas about specific topics, this book is primarily intended to share how I think. I do not claim anything in this book is really special; most of it is really common-sense. I don’t even claim that it 
is all correct: remember, I am just a normal guy, and I really can’t be bothered to spend the time and energy doing research.

Every sentient human must aspire to have a consistent moral and intellectual framework for themselves. This framework must guide their lives and the rules they live by. This idea has nothing to do with conservatism or 
imposition of arbitrary rules, but simply a method of organization. Evolutionarily speaking, I do not think we were designed to be able to deal with the magnitude of information and sensory inputs we are ravished by 
constantly, and I believe all the ill-effects of rampant misinformation, the creation and propagation of newer and dumber conspiracy theories, or the sudden rise in mental illnesses, are all in some way tied to the fact that 
there is simply too much information to deal with, and because we have never learnt or been taught how to handle this flood, each of us responds in ways determined by their own basic resilience; some thrive, some get consumed 
by it, somewhere in between. Surely we can do better.

Finally, it is of critical importance to understand that under ALL this, all the monumental corpus of our collective intellectual achievements as a species, there lies the simple, inescapable fact: ultimately, it truly is all 
pointless. The circumstances we have created for ourselves have basically mandated the aforementioned misery and torture in order to achieve any kind of happiness - if you’re American, there is no free lunch. Being able to 
laugh at oneself, each other, and everything the universe contains, is the only way to survive.

With that, let’s begin.

Chapter 1:

What are we doing here?

Think of a number. Now ask yourself - why that number? What was the process by which you decided on that particular number? Was there even a process? I cannot say how it is for you; but for me, it is automatic. When someone 
asks me to pick a number, ‘I’ need only wait momentarily, and suddenly a number presents itself, made available for my perception. One moment, there is no number thought of; then the question comes, and suddenly I can ‘feel’ 
a 7. There is no reason for this, or atleast, none I can analyze further without resorting to speculative flights of fancy. What I know for certain is while I ‘feel’ like I am in control of my thoughts, I am neither in 
control of my thoughts, nor of my feelings. I claim this is true of everyone, and is not nearly a shocking revelation; the parts of our brain that give us the first person view of the world, and the sense of identity, serves 
only to ‘perceive’ the thoughts/ideas that the brain generates. This is true not just of numbers or even of demands to select numbers or words or colors, but instead true of every thought we have - we do not decide what to 
think, and we cannot say for certain what thought we will have 60 seconds from now - thoughts are just generated by ‘some process’, and our conscious identity only perceives it. Of course, we have created more problems than 
we have solved - one needs to understand this ‘some process’, ‘consciousness’ and ‘perception’ in order to use them as parts of a potential explanation. I should clarify that I do not claim this to be a biological fact - the 
point is, this over-simplification is functionally accurate enough, meaning it describes our experience with perception reasonably well without speculation or overly-vague claims, and will be a recurring theme over the next 
discussions. But given our general consensus that there is such a thing as consciousness, such a thing as perception, and there is an (unknown/not completely known) underlying process to it all, I claim that as an extremely 
oversimplified rudimentary model, it serves well enough. Remember, there is nothing wrong with over-simplifications and over-generalizations as long as one correctly recognizes the deficiencies in these approaches, indeed, 
this kind of bottom up pay-as-you-go theorizing can help reduce seemingly insurmountable complexity to something significantly more manageable. In this case, our stupid ‘model’ is already good enough to pose a supremely 
difficult(but not complex) question: how much of human behavior is truly voluntary, and what indeed would truly voluntary behavior look like? This is important; if it is indeed true that all our behavior across cultures is 
not a matter of voluntary decisions, but of a collection of organisms simply responding to their internal automation (whatever that might be, through whatever processes there might be), convinced that the perception of these 
thoughts is equivalent to a voluntary creation of these thoughts, we can tentatively accept that the constellation of activities that humans engage in is more representative of our fundamental tendencies (whether congenital 
or learned) as a species rather than of our own measure based on some moral framework. Further, we are now faced with an additional question - even if we assume the things we think, like, or do are ‘automatic’, why do we 
behave the way we do? For example, I like ice-cream. I am especially partial to vanilla. I like ice-cream because it is cold, sweet, and the flavor of vanilla is something I deeply enjoy. But why do I like cold, sweet 
vanilla-flavored foodstuffs? I do not know. Perhaps there is an evolutionary reason - cold stuff helps cool the body down, and sweet stuff often has sugar, which is energy for the body, and it is reasonable to propose that 
over the span of human evolution, the primates that ate more cold sweet stuff had more energy and were simply better equipped to deal with tropical heat, and the ones that had the genetic predisposition to like cold sweet 
stuff simply had better chances of survival. Why then do I like vanilla? Well, natural selection can explain this too - it is not that I was specifically designed to like vanilla, but that the vanilla plants that bore beans 
with the specific chemical composition that resulted in the flavor we are familiar with and enjoy so much, simply had a better chance of reproduction. It is important to note that one must be careful with trying to explain 
our traits exclusively using natural selection; while there can often be elegant and seemingly perfectly sensible explanations of our traits, these explanations are also fundamentally speculative until they are not, and while 
fossil evidence is definitive, it is also a matter of chance. There could be (and probably is) evidence of every single step of our entire evolutionary path, we just need to look for it in every single place our ancestors 
could have died at. So while evolution by natural selection is beyond dispute, and every trait we possess is indeed the result of some aspect of the process of natural selection, one must approach any attempts at the specific 
reasons why certain mutations resulted in better chances for the organisms that had them, with caution. That said, it is possible to come up with truly elegant arguments for the existence of particular traits simply by 
looking through the lens of evolution and natural selection, and while they may not be exactly accurate, thinking on these lines proves to be a superb weapon in our arsenal.

This is not a far-fetched idea; all our crimes, even the ones we consider most egregious, are indeed extremely commonplace in the animal kingdom. To summarize, whatever our moral evaluations might be, there are certain habits 
that are characteristic of humans; even if they are not nearly the norm, it is still only us, despite their rarity, that over the span of human history occur with astounding regularity. Before we can determine how we should 
function or what needs to change in our social behavior, we must first examine the specific ‘hard limits’ on our ability to think, analyze and perceive the universe. As I hinted at earlier, I am subject to these same hard 
limits, but I am not intelligent or qualified enough to be troubled by them. This is important, because bar a few anomalous instances of prodigious genius over the span of human history, and more frequent instances of 
intelligence far above the average, all human thought, perception and expression happens in a spectacularly limited cage. This cage is the area where the smartest and the stupidest, and those like myself neither here nor 
there, live in, marveling or screaming at each other, arguing, hypothesizing, analyzing, and attempting to understand the fundamental pointlessness of our existence and the lengths to which we have gone as a species to 
distract and distance ourselves from this idea. Then there is the fact that this cage itself sits in a metaphorical zoo; this zoo determines what we CAN know, and this is an actual hard limit, bound by the laws of physics and 
not a reflection on our abilities. Every great genius and every great moron amongst us lives in this zoo, and compared to the information in the universe, the two are not too far apart.

Nearly all of the universe will forever be a mystery to us.

We do not know what the nearest stars are doing at this very instant, and we cannot know, because there is a hard limit to the speed at which information can travel, and light must obey that limit, and therefore, the moment 
you look at the sky, you are looking at the past. Sunlight itself takes about eight minutes to reach us, so if the sun were to suddenly vanish, we wouldn’t know for about that same time ***. There is absolutely nothing we can 
do about this. To understand how hopelessly limited we are, consider that the immediate next closest star to us, Alpha Centauri, is about four light-years away, so if it vanished at this very moment, we would not notice until 
four years later. It is truly humbling to grab a telescope and look at the night sky, and consider the fact that the light from any stars we can see has been traveling for anywhere between four and about fourteen billion 
years - we are forever locked in this past in terms of observability. It is also funny to consider that when you look at the furthest, dimmest stars in the night sky, their light has been traveling for thousands, millions, 
even billions of years, only to stop dead at your retina. (*infinitesimal but non-zero - INZ) In fact, it takes INZ time for any information from our immediate surroundings to reach us, and it takes INZ time for these stimuli 
to excite our sensory organs, INZ time to travel as neural impulses to our brain, and it takes INZ time for our brain to process this information, and INZ time to formulate a response, and INZ time for this response to 
translate into action. Simply put, we cannot know the absolute present. In fact, there IS no absolute present - every single observer has their own measure of the present and their own measure of the passage of time 
determined by their motion. For our daily experiences this is generally irrelevant, but as we move out of our immediate surroundings this hard limit on information can add up really quickly. The situation gets even worse when 
we consider that the above limits are on information; light in vacuum travels at this upper limit, but in any medium including air, it slows down. Further, all other potential sensory inputs travel significantly slower - 
sound travels orders of magnitude slower - about 344 meters per second in air. If I were dying at this moment and I screamed for help from a mile away (assuming you could hear me), you would not hear the scream for about four 
seconds. There is nothing we can do about this. (well, technically we could convert the sound to radio waves and I could scream at you through a phone, but that isn’t the point).

If the physical limits weren’t cruel enough, there are the limits on our own intuition and ability to understand. All our intuitive understanding of our environment and the way in which things behave is a matter of evolution; 
without the use of additional instruments, we can only perceive what we ‘need’ to perceive in order to have a good chance of survival. A difference of a fraction of a second can mean life or death for a baby that slips off a 
mothers hold, or an adult standing next to a tree falling over. We never needed more resolution, and thus it is that while nearly all of us can tell that a half second ‘feels’ different from a second or a quarter second, the 
vast majority of humans could not tell the difference between a hundredth and a hundred-and-fifth of a second. (If you are curious, there is a fascinating set of games by the Music Lab, a joint venture by Yale and the 
University of Auckland- try the beat perception exercises, and try not to get too upset at the scores. I think this illustrates our ability to tell time as well as anything else does). Of course, one can learn to achieve 
higher resolutions, and this varies by the intellect of individuals, but intelligence itself is a poorly understood phenomenon; we do not know what specifically made Albert Einstein so smart, for instance. We just know that 
he was, and a major part of this abnormal intelligence manifests in the ability to intuit and imagine. Out of the box (or womb), we are spectacularly limited beings, and there exist similar limits on every type of stimulus we 
can perceive, from length/distance, colors, audio frequencies, temperatures, and even touch (interestingly, there is really no sense of touch; we only have temperature and pressure sensitivity, which is why sensory 
deprivation tanks are possible at all in spite of being in full-body contact with a tank full of water). Finally, there is the most insidious and mysterious limitation of them all, the explanatory gap. The gist of this idea 
is that while language serves well enough to convey ideas and emotions, we are utterly alone in our internal experiences, unable to communicate them. What drives language is a general agreement on what certain sounds must be 
interpreted to mean, and a vague consensus on what these meanings ‘feel’ like; but this has absolutely nothing to do with truly conveying what these feelings feel like to us, individually, within. As a simple example, we have 
a general agreement that the color of the day sky must be referred to by the word ‘blue’, and we have a tacit consensus on what blue is: but indeed, it is impossible to know whether how this color ‘feels’ to me internally is 
the same as how it feels to you - in principle, what you see when you look at the sky may be what I see when I look at a road - but we have no conflict because we have already agreed that skies are blue and roads are dark 
gray, so what these colors feel like to each of us in our minds is irrelevant. There is nothing we can do about this either. There seems to be an insurmountable limit to our ability to express ourselves to others of our own 
kind. And then there is the far more fundamental limit - the limit on our ability to understand our own selves. Here is the problem: not only are we severely limited in our capacity, and in how much of the universe the laws 
of nature allow us to examine, we are also subject to a fascinating limitation that is rarely spoken about - and this has to do with the quality of our perception. For most of us, the basic assumption that the world we 
perceive IS the world, is functionally sound, and has a vast body of evidence to support it. However, we know this cannot be quite right, strictly speaking. We do not know much about the ‘architecture’ of the brain. We 
understand the physical topology of the brain quite well, and we have a strong and growing grasp on the way different parts of the brain undertake different functions, and the way they interact with each other. But the issue 
of consciousness still remains a bitch of a problem, because there is a fundamental difficulty in a system attempting to explain itself based on the evidence of its own perception. I do not have any theories on why we are 
conscious, and in possession of a sense of self and personal identity; it is evident that sentience is not a requirement for survival.


Once upon a time, there lived a group of early humans in a cave. The group consisted of a few families. The males were the hunters and gatherers, the females were the healers and caretakers, and the children were the result 
of a need to breed. One night, there was a loud noise outside the cave. Curious, a courageous male ventured outside to examine, and was promptly mauled to death by a cave lion. From that night on, no more members of the group 
ventured outside in the dark to study curious noises.

That story is made up, but it is also plausible enough to make the claim that it almost certainly happened many times over the course of human history. The lesson to be learned here is the following - courage and curiosity 
are concepts that can only exist within the confines of relative safety. When danger lies everywhere, there is no courage, there is only wisdom and stupidity - there is some courage in deciding to go paragliding, but to do so 
without a parachute is not courage- it’s stupidity. However, there is a more subtle trait that can be observed at play in this imaginary scenario - pattern recognition. All it took was one pointless death, one hero left half 
eaten, to understand what might happen when one ventures into the dark to examine odd noises. One might suggest that is a gross generalization, that most noises are just trees blowing in the breeze or harmless critters 
running around outside the cave, but there is an advantage to this ‘stupid’ generalization. One can easily see how courageous people have a higher likelihood of ending up dead, significantly more so in the past. 
Unfortunately, this also means a relatively lower likelihood of passing on their genes - if we go with the idea (recognizing that I have no idea if this is true or not) that psychological traits are subject to the same 
processes of natural selection and physical traits, the cowardly and the meek had better chances of passing on their genes, simply by virtue of having a longer average lifespan. One must also note that assuming persistent 
danger on the basis of a few isolated incidents is, by all modern standards, stupid; the intelligent thing to do would be to collect more data, perhaps a better understanding of the specific noises that occur outside the cave 
to figure out which noises signal danger and which noises might actually grant a nice meal, or even some statistics to determine the likelihood of danger based on the time of night or seasons of the year, the terrain and 
climate and local flora and fauna - but there is some advantage to choosing an overgeneralization for a sense of safety over intelligent examination of circumstances. The applicability of this idea to current social 
circumstances is immediately obvious.

The above paragraph may well be complete nonsense, but the point here is seeing humanity through the lens of natural selection allows for a convenient and frequently consistent framework for hypothesizing the reasons for the 
state of humanity today. I am not interested in specific behavior from specific people; I am far more interested in understanding our persistent and compelling drive to not just engage in activities that are already 
considered, across most cultures, to be morally wrong, but in some extreme cases, derive pleasure from them, whether psychological or sexual. I will do this frequently, so understand that these are meant to be mere thought 
experiments, and not a scientific hypothesis. A simple anecdote such as this can still allow for interesting insights into the processes by which we went from being the most advanced species in the observable universe that we 
know of, to a species that seems entirely unable to stop its own gradual destruction, in spite of knowing we will reach our end by our own hand. I am not a biologist, or anthropologist, or paleontologist, or any other kind of 
-ist (except perhaps a nihilist) - but most people in the world are not specialists, and given that they form the bulk of social opinion across societies and cultures in the world, it makes sense to listen to a non-expert 
formally once in a while: the greatest doctor in the world cannot cure a patient if the patient is not allowed to speak. If we are to hope for any large–scale social transformation, we must first understand the ways in which 
seemingly logical ideas can lead to spectacularly awful conclusions, and the ways in which rudimentary internal consistency is often ‘good enough’ for ‘most people’, good enough to leave actual correctness fundamentally 
irrelevant. I shall also try to avoid common ideas and arguments that have been made before, because that would be a waste of your money. This means that a lot of what I suggest will be ‘incorrect’, but I propose that 
deliberately over-reading situations and following fallacious trains of thought can still lead to interesting ideas, and in particular, the specific fallacies that we are prone to also say a lot about our nature. That said, 
over the remainder of this book, I shall attempt to demonstrate that the state we are in today is not only natural and obvious, but inevitable. This has nothing to do with correctness, whether factual or moral: this is a safe 
space, and we are free to make stupid mistakes and obvious logical errors without risking ostracization, just to see where these threads take us. There is a secret general consensus that we have fallen off the rails as a 
species, and I want to explore how and why, by recreating these same mistakes within the controlled environment of a text file. I am sure many will think this entire book can be compressed into a single line - “We are fucked 
as a species”, but fatalism of that sort is pointless, and I am both high and bored. Finally, I claim that in our current state, we exist as two different organisms at once, with two distinct internal value systems - one 
being ‘correct’, valuing intelligence and analysis and empiricism (by personal standards at least), and the other an artifact of the caveman that never left the cave, and the traits that we have been ‘selecting’ for ever 
since, whether on purpose or by chance. Remember: these are my ideas, and I believe they make sense. I understand they may be incorrect. I am putting them down anyway.

Now that we have agreed on my non-expertise on any subject, we can proceed to our discussion. Before we can determine how we should function or what needs to change in our social behavior, we must first examine the specific 
‘hard limits’ on our ability to think, analyze and perceive the universe. As I hinted at earlier, I am subject to these same hard limits, but I am not intelligent or qualified enough to be troubled by them. This is important, 
because bar a few anomalous instances of prodigious genius over the span of human history, and more frequent instances of intelligence far above the average, all human thought, perception and expression happens in a 
spectacularly limited cage. This cage is the area where the smartest and the stupidest, and those like myself neither here nor there, live in, marveling or screaming at each other, arguing, hypothesizing, analyzing, and 
attempting to understand the fundamental pointlessness of our existence and the lengths to which we have gone as a species to distract and distance ourselves from this idea. Then there is the fact that this cage itself sits 
in a metaphorical zoo; this zoo determines what we CAN know, and this is an actual hard limit, bound by the laws of physics and not a reflection on our abilities. Every great genius and every great moron amongst us lives in 
this zoo, and compared to the information in the universe, the two are not too far apart.

Nearly all of the universe will forever be a mystery to us.

We do not know what the nearest stars are doing at this very instant, and we cannot know, because there is a hard limit to the speed at which information can travel, and light must obey that limit, and therefore, the moment 
you look at the sky, you are looking at the past. Sunlight itself takes about eight minutes to reach us, so if the sun were to suddenly vanish, we wouldn’t know for about that same time ***. There is absolutely nothing we can 
do about this. To understand how hopelessly limited we are, consider that the immediate next closest star to us, Alpha Centauri, is about four light-years away, so if it vanished at this very moment, we would not notice until 
four years later. It is truly humbling to grab a telescope and look at the night sky, and consider the fact that the light from any stars we can see has been traveling for anywhere between four and about fourteen billion 
years - we are forever locked in this past in terms of observability. It is also funny to consider that when you look at the furthest, dimmest stars in the night sky, their light has been traveling for thousands, millions, 
even billions of years, only to stop dead at your retina. (*infinitesimal but non-zero - INZ) In fact, it takes INZ time for any information from our immediate surroundings to reach us, and it takes INZ time for these stimuli 
to excite our sensory organs, INZ time to travel as neural impulses to our brain, and it takes INZ time for our brain to process this information, and INZ time to formulate a response, and INZ time for this response to 
translate into action. Simply put, we cannot know the absolute present. In fact, there IS no absolute present - every single observer has their own measure of the present and their own measure of the passage of time 
determined by their motion. For our daily experiences this is generally irrelevant, but as we move out of our immediate surroundings this hard limit on information can add up really quickly. The situation gets even worse when 
we consider that the above limits are on information; light in vacuum travels at this upper limit, but in any medium including air, it slows down. Further, all other potential sensory inputs travel significantly slower - 
sound travels orders of magnitude slower - about 344 meters per second in air. If I were dying at this moment and I screamed for help from a mile away (assuming you could hear me), you would not hear the scream for about four 
seconds. There is nothing we can do about this. (well, technically we could convert the sound to radio waves and I could scream at you through a phone, but that isn’t the point).

If the physical limits weren’t cruel enough, there are the limits on our own intuition and ability to understand. All our intuitive understanding of our environment and the way in which things behave is a matter of evolution; 
without the use of additional instruments, we can only perceive what we ‘need’ to perceive in order to have a good chance of survival. A difference of a fraction of a second can mean life or death for a baby that slips off a 
mothers hold, or an adult standing next to a tree falling over. We never needed more resolution, and thus it is that while nearly all of us can tell that a half second ‘feels’ different from a second or a quarter second, the 
vast majority of humans could not tell the difference between a hundredth and a hundred-and-fifth of a second. (If you are curious, there is a fascinating set of games by the Music Lab, a joint venture by Yale and the 
University of Auckland- try the beat perception exercises, and try not to get too upset at the scores. I think this illustrates our ability to tell time as well as anything else does). Of course, one can learn to achieve 
higher resolutions, and this varies by the intellect of individuals, but intelligence itself is a poorly understood phenomenon; we do not know what specifically made Albert Einstein so smart, for instance. We just know that 
he was, and a major part of this abnormal intelligence manifests in the ability to intuit and imagine. Out of the box (or womb), we are spectacularly limited beings, and there exist similar limits on every type of stimulus we 
can perceive, from length/distance, colors, audio frequencies, temperatures, and even touch (interestingly, there is really no sense of touch; we only have temperature and pressure sensitivity, which is why sensory 
deprivation tanks are possible at all in spite of being in full-body contact with a tank full of water). Finally, there is the ultimate intellectual straitjacket - the explanatory gap. The gist of this idea is that while 
language serves well enough to convey ideas and emotions, we are utterly alone in our internal experiences, unable to ever truly communicate the things we feel. What drives language is a general agreement on what certain 
sounds must be interpreted to mean, and a vague consensus on what these meanings ‘feel’ like; but this has absolutely nothing to do with truly conveying what these feelings feel like to us, individually, within. Part of the 
reason is that there is already sufficient variation in the way people perceive thoughts - where someone people have ‘thoughts’ as an abstract concept presenting itself in a way that makes the brain go from “no thought” to 
“knowing the thought” without any intervening deliberate process, we know there are others who think in sentences, by their own reporting. The problem starts becoming apparent rapidly, as any scientific investigation of the 
mind must necessarily operate with this firewall in place; I, as a researcher, cannot really know whether your description of your internal experiences is actually an accurate description, and that it matches with what I 
believe your description to describe, or if it is simply your best explanation of it, or it is a completely different ‘feeling’ that you have just learned to describe as you did. As a simple example, we have a general 
agreement that the color of the day sky must be referred to by the word ‘blue’, and we have a tacit consensus on what blue is: but indeed, it is impossible to know whether how this color ‘feels’ to me internally is the same 
as how it feels to you - in principle, what you see when you look at the sky may be what I see when I look at a road - but we have no conflict because we have already agreed that skies are blue and roads are dark gray, so 
what these colors feel like to each of us in our minds is irrelevant. There is nothing we can do about this either. This is a problem. Atleast at the present time, considering the importance we place on our emotional 
responses to events, surely we should make sure we actually feel what we claim to feel, and that it is indeed what others in your camp feel, as opposed to just their best descriptions of those feelings. All this is to say 
that our ‘intelligence’ and our abilities are mostly a construct that only works relative to other members of our society. There are but a few ways to overcome this limitation, and even the

*The fundamental paradox in the idea of world peace is that to be open and accepting of everyone without regard to race, gender, sex or culture is that it requires everyone to participate in the deliberate disregarding of 
their own sentiments towards those things, which is impossible.


Chapter 1: TMI

One of the qualities of modern society I find most fascinating is the specific changes that entities undergo, and how certain entities seem to prefer certain qualitative transformations, and the way in which humans prefer to 
pay particular attention to aberrations from these tendencies. That “everything” is changing is well known, and has been the subject of countless articles and poems and every other kind of artistic expression we could muster 
for a long time. There is however, a certain delicious irony in certain events that led to spectacular transformations that, were they a story, I would appreciate as real-good-writing. As an illustrative example, consider 
Syria. Today, there are few countries objectively worse than Syria as a retirement destination. There is no shortage of information on exactly how bad things have been, and how the country seems to shuttle between horrible 
and slightly less horrible, so if you are unaware, or have only a vague sense of the situation from headlines that you’ve glanced and glossed over, this would be a good time to do some reading. Syria had one of the most 
ancient civilizations on earth with a long, tumultuous and deeply fascinating history that started nearly 12,000 years ago, with some illustrious achievements like the earliest known alphabet (Ugaritic). This has been studied 
in great detail, and I strongly suggest you browse through the subject, not necessarily to actually learn, but just to get a sense of the magnitude of progress that was achieved. Specifically, I want to mention the ancient 
city-state of Mari, and the library of Zimri-Lim. Mari reached its peak somewhere between 2900 and 1760 BC. Ponder this for a moment - this magnificent society, a trade center and a powerful state in itself, existed in 
circumstances that would be completely foreign to us today. None of the major world religions we see today were around, or at least not world religions, and the cultural landscape consequently was completely different to 
ours. In fact, one might argue it was truly a different world; everything has changed for the region since then, from the geology and geography, to the diets and deities. Within this kingdom was the library of Zimri-Lim - a 
collection of over twenty-five thousand Akkadian-language clay tablets in cuneiform. Situated in the Royal Palace of Mari, these tablets included information about the kingdom, customs, the names of the people who lived 
during that time, and various letters. Also included were administrative, economic and judicial texts, and a few tablets in a different extinct language. I like to think about the people who wrote these tablets. People just 
like you and I, poring over small slabs of clay, painstakingly pressing the cuneiform wedge and writing out a record of their life, with the sincere belief that it was a necessary thing to do. The kingdom has vanished, and so 
have the people, the country itself lies in shambles; even their gods could not survive the inherently destructive force that a society can be, and yet, the record-keeper did not concern himself with this potential 
eventuality, instead diligently contributing to their own little “We were here” flag on the pile with all the other dead societies. Think of how important the recording of this information was to them, think of how important 
the person doing the recording was. Within the relatively short lifespan of the kingdom, the people went from not having a script, to having one, and using that script to make detailed records of things they deemed important 
- things that are absolutely worthless to any of us (beyond the academic and anthropological value, of course), names most of us could not pronounce, social and legal norms that would be alien to us, and generally existing in 
a culture that has absolutely no overlap with ours today. And yet, the writings on those tablets had value. At one point in history before the writings on those tablets, there was no information written, all knowledge shared 
by speech alone, and then over the span of just around fifty years, was built this corpus of knowledge without which we would have known much less about them. There is an undeniable overarching theme that outlines what our 
species seems to be generally interested in - money, power, and random beliefs to somehow convince ourselves we have some control over the far future and our own eventual destinites. Consider the fact that had they had paper, 
and had these writings been on paper, they almost certainly would not have survived being buried under thousands of years of geological and sociological debris. Consider the fact that these writings were important enough to 
be placed with the royal palace; think of these kings and queens, the power they held over the people, more or less the same atrocities committed upon them as we do today. Think of King Zimri-Lim, the man who probably oversaw 
much of this. Think of his reaction: if someone were to tell them in about 4000 years, a group of people (ISIS) would destroy the entire site because it had the wrong god. Deliberate thought and design went into the 
construction of this palace, but the utilitarian was balanced with the aesthetic too. Statues and frescoes laid about, elaborate paintings for public viewing, and intricate geometrical designs for the private quarters. 
Imagine the number of people involved in these artistic endeavors, the paint supplier who ground up stones and insects and plants to create the greens, blues and reds that made the paintings, think of the stones and insects 
and plants that were ground up to paint the wall in a king’s palace. Every single aspect of the creation of those tablets had its own individual history, each a culmination of its own set of pieces, with their own histories.

And yet, all that remains of this magnificent culture is a set of ruins. It is evident to me that as much historical value as those tablets held, in spite of the importance the texts held to the participants of the society, 
from the king, to the potters, scribes, scholars, and paint-makers, the ‘information’ itself was entirely, over the span of human existence, of no importance at all. These artifacts of a bygone era do nothing beyond tell us 
about that era itself. All the citizens of Mari who were not involved in the production of these tablets, could have lived their entire lives never glancing at the texts or the poems, and it would have made no difference at 
all. I do not believe in the existence of a god. I understand that the lack of evidence for a god does not mean one does not exist, and therefore the only truly rational position to be taken on this subject is “I do not 
know”. I do not know if there is a divine being, and I acknowledge that it is possible for one to exist. Specifically, once the claim that any such divine being must exist out of our physical laws is allowed, there is really 
no way of proving such a god could not exist. Of course, one might just as easily claim to be god themselves - there is no evidence to the contrary there either, and any calls to “prove that you are a god” could be fought off 
with “you just have to believe or you will be punished for eternity”, but that is too easy an argument. there is similar lack of evidence to the contrary for ghosts, vampires, and aliens.
