And this is what I do not understand about the fundamental ideas of good and evil, beyond the most obvious. Sure, pleasure is good, pain is bad, a primitive, but reliable beginning.
But why is the good side good? Imagine if someone kidnapped my wife, and my manservant torched the entire country; I'm sorry, that is just stupid. 

The way abortion-opponents view babies is the way vegetarians for ethical reasons view chicken. The disagreement is the same, and so is the resolution: if you like chicken, eat chicken. If you think chickens are unjustly subjected to a genocide of Hitlerian proportions four times a day, every single day, do not kill or eat chicken. If you are pregnant and do not want to be, have an abortion. Well, how long into the pregnancy can I do it? If there is no way to calculate a precise answer, rely on primitive logic and natural justice, and say halfway; if the foetus is closer to being a baby than to a contraceptive mishap, it shall be a baby; if not, it shall be put to death. If you disagree, do not get abortions.

With enough imagination, meaning can be found in the absolute meaningless.

Evil preys on the innocent, the weak, the innocent, and the proud.

In a way, the brain is essentially a language model; only, the outputs are filtered through specialized logical and analytical processsing areas of the brain, the conscious mind only being aware of what pops out of the other end, whether it's "the speed of light is constant for all observers", or "what if I jumped off this cliff?".

The ultimate judge of an artwork's worth is the one that commissions it. 

Staring into a bonfire in my opinion, is one of the last connecting threads we have left to the feeling of being an early man, the feeling of truly free. Somehow, no matter how much green we replace with concrete and how much of our lives we fill with screens, all the progress and noise and chaos simple vanishes.

We are a species in denial, tormented by the delusion that evil is only the dominion of evil people. The truth is, there really is no such thing as evil; good and evil are often merely a matter of perspective; a fisherman who releases his fish is Good, but the fish that suddenly had a hooked pierced through its lip, dragged out of the water, and then thrown back into the water, thank you and goodbye, would see nothing but pointless evil inflicting injuries for recreational reasons. We are all good, we are all evil, and we say the words so often they don't mean anything anymore, thrown around as weapons to win arguments or demand money on behalf of creator dieties - but of absolutely no practical significance whatsoever. There is no god, what comes after your death is exactly what was before your birth is exactly what you see out of your elbow, there will be no more peace, there will always be rapists and murderers and bigots, and none of it matters, because like the ship of Theseus, every single one of us gets replaced eventually, and the ones that come after us will make the same mistakes, celebrate the same victories, mourn the same defeats, and at the end of it all, die the same pointless deaths. Our weapons will get more advanced, but they will still be various ways of poisoning or making holes in each other, and the ones who start the wars will never die in battle, etc, etc, etc.

The point is, it is fine to have a purpose, even noble; it is fine to have ambitions, and to want to have a positive impact in the world. But ambition, optimism, and all our hopes and dreams must be supported by the rock-solid logic of the only ultimate truth of the universe: there IS no point. There is no shame in being useless, there is no shame in being a drug addled pig floating away in the imaginations of a drug addled brain, there is no shame in doing nothing. Every single species that ever was and ever will be, spends every moment being itself. 

Spaghetti economy: everything's linked to everything else, so we are fucked. A rational strategy might start with the most useless activities that pollute - jewellery. Rare metals and minerals, incredible amounts of energy consumed and chemical wastes generated, while miners get paid shit, all to make tiny ornaments to hang off our bodies. I cannot think of a worse offender in the category of Useless Pollutants. We do not need jewellery. No one needs jewellery. No one needs diamond rings. No one needs gold. "What about the economy" - fuck the economy, I'd rather live. There is no government or company that will accept economic downturns in favor of environmentally conscious decisions. It falls to us. Stop buying garbage you do not need - not only does it fuck the planet, the entire supply chain involves a shocking amount of abuse and exploitation.

In conclusion, I don't really know. We shouldn't have let disco die.


The axe and the tree.

Wood and metal derive their strength from very different sources. As a result, their strength manifests in very different ways. 
A complete description of the reasons metals are generally 'hard' would be several pages long (and if I held to my promise of no research, shit), but put simply, there are special physical processes at play in metals that lead to peculiar physical properties, ultimately leading to a mass of pure metal to act sort of like a bunch of crystals stuck together, making deformations physically inconvenient. This, in conjunction with some other effects, makes most metals generally hard, with the hardness depending on the scale in a certain sense (metallic elements want to be crystals, but bulk metals rarely are on any scale beyond the microscopic. (I could have rephrased it simply as "metals are hard because things and stuff make it so", but I threw in a little jargon to set you off on what I hope will be a long and rewarding career in solid state physics. Of course, in physics-speak, anything that conducts electricity at absolute zero is considered a metal, so this is all oversimplified absurdity anyway. Or is it overcomplicated? Sometimes I can't tell.)
Wood, in a way, is the exact opposite. Wood is a polymer, consisting of strands of cellulose fibres glued together by a set of complex polymers collectively referred to as lignin. Hardwoods differ from softwoods mainly in just the amount of 'wood' per volume. Generally, softwoods contain relatively large amounts of other chemical compounds (fats/esters/hydrocarbons/terpenes/phenols), while hardwoods contain significantly less of, having basically replaced this empty volume with more 'wood', the cellulose/hemicellulose/lignin matrix, resulting in a denser wood. Different trees yield woods with different physical properties, but while these are called differences in the wood, the material itself is the same, and would behave the same for the same mass).
The point is, it doesn't matter how thick the wood is. There can be noble professions made 


The heartbreaking resignation of 'carbon tax': a consensus the most advanced known species in the universe cannot be bothered to fix its environment unless it 'costs money'. 

Gold or water.

Gold is precious. Water is precious, but in a very different way. 
Gold is precious by consensus; enough people believe it is valuable, and it is exactly
as valuable as people believe it to be. Water is precious as a necessity; without it, we will die, and there are no substitutes to water. 
A lot of what we believe to be 'valuable', whether values, ideas, or real estate, are valuable simply because enough people have adopted this idea. It is important to analyze and realize where the value of things and ideas comes from, and have a robust understanding of what is valuable by necessity, because in a sense, practically every precious entity outside of this set is merely a matter of voluntary participation.

Octopuses. Why do they die?
What is the evolutionary edvantage in dying after mating? Well, as far as evolution is 
concerned, anything that happens after the genes have been passed on is immaterial. 
Crucially, the ancestors of octopuses that did not have this characteristic, 
actually had no particular advantage; until the point of mating, the ones that would 
die after mating were no different from the ones that would....????
I think humans will eventually turn into octopuses. Octopuses are to human lives what 
the word 'sound' is to the collected works of beethoven. An insulting, but accurate summary. The males are born, mate, and die. They try all kinds of stupid shit to mate, 
they do all kinds of stupid shit to each other to try and win the chance to mate...
but once they mate, they die. Their genitals are connected to their digestive systems 
and their eyes, and yes it is an insane fucking design. But the males mate, and they die.
The females live longer than males. They mate with a few, knowing they are leaving behind corpses. They do it anyway, because they can. Every octopus you have ever seen
is a female, because females are big enough to film. males are about an inch, and are 
basically an intelligent brain, a penis, and a plastic bag with tentacles around it. 
The females are, on average, several thousand times larger thanthe male, so it gets to
slap, kick, or just eat the male, if it so chooses. Or even by accident, because it's 
such a tiny fucking thing. It's alright. It doesn't matter. The female is going to lay about 70,000 to a few million eggs. She is a doting mother; she nurses, fans and keeps the eggs clean and fresh, until they hatch. Only, she isn't eating while she's doing this. And as the next generation grows, she wastes away. When the babies hatch, she'll 
be the first thing they eat.
It's an entire story, with just the facts, and none of the drama. 90% water, what do you
expect.

And then there are feelings we would rather not acknowledge. We know they exist in the moment, but there is no need to think of them otherwise. The starry eyed dreamer, whizzing through teenage years and broken dreams, waiting for something extraordinary to happen to them. Of course, it often ends the same way, compromising, finding the right balance between ambition and fantasy leaning towards fantasy; they will likely never be a world famous singer, or writer, or actor, or model, or revolutionary, and there is no word for the exact emotion that consumes a mind, on the exact moment the last dream dies and reality finally kicks its way in. The exact moment when you truly feel the fact in your bone, that there is no "once I have done this...", the grotesque, gaudy shamelessness of it all, the way it, for a brief moment, eclipses your sense of being altogether, and a light in you, somewhere, just goes out, never to return, and the rest of your life from that point on is essentially procedure with a few twists thrown in, and it is a moment of monumental importance to one's life, the moment the mind learns that it is possible, even that is totally inconsequential whether one even bothers to dream, because once that switch is thrown, all dreams become disposable entities, mostly just for the rush one feels playing with a new idea, but then that fades, and the dream becomes a goal, and a goal becomes a diversion from pragmatism, and thus becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy in itself, a stupid unrealistic fantasy precisely because it has been designated as such. You are your mind, this is true, but your mind is also a side effect of essentially special electrified meat, and this meat does a lot of things whether you want it or not, because the 'you' is an emergent side effect, and as evidenced by most life on the earth, completely unnecessary for survival itself, and because the special meat comes empty of information at birth, it is designed to learn, absorb, make connections, in ways that are fundamentally different from the way our conscious self learns, resulting in wildly different consequences.

Few motivations are as punishingly reliable as wounded pride. Under every determined warrior is a narcissist with an in-built emotional 'stick' preventing them from accepting defeat, and shameless is a significant factor in determination and persistence. What motivates the dreamers to reach for ridiculous goals is often hubris and grandiose ambition, and what helps them succeed is often the vulgar desire to be considered worthy. Unsophisticated though it might be, it is hard to imagine what a life with no ego would look like; an astoundingly high percentage of our daily activites are ultimately motivated by the compulsive need for social validation, or atleast avoiding humiliation; the first thing most people do after a fall is not checking for injuries, but dusting off their clothes.`

Pretending we are all happy with each other is such a waste of energy, and for what benefit? Peace cannot be enforced, and prohibiting the dissemination of certain opinions does not make them vanish, they just fester without you knowing about it. Further, considerations of love, politeness and respect aside, there are legitimate reasons to hate practically every group of people. It is better to just state them clearly, even if just once - try and get to the root of said contempt, and then attempt reconsoliations or seek retributions as one sees fit. The act of being honest in our opinions, no matter how stupid, is irreievant, because the problem is our particular mix of circumstances and social moods, a consequence of everything that happened in the past, seems to keep giving us strong reasons to hate each other. Further, considering the sudden change in the scale of problems we face, this is a bad time to be fucking around with manners, and it is absolutely possible to condemn ideas and ideologies without extending the attack to those that subscribe to them (though there are times when it is necessary, or just too enjoyable).

Religions are what happen when flights of fancy are not discouraged starting at teenage. Anyone who claims god could create adam out of dust, but for eve he needed his bone, and for jesus he needed a middle-eastern virgin's womb. 

I wonder if Africa has been, and continues to be ravaged by any government with money and a power complex. I know absolutely nothing about how human psychology operates on a social scale, nor do I know anything about any adjacent subjects to even venture a guess. (This means there is nothing to counter my imagination.)
The colonial era saw much of the world claimed by a handful of mostly European powers. Of these, some nations managed to win their independence sooner than others, some nations with sufficient cultural proximity (or sufficient local populations of foreign colonists) ended up entering into domestic partnerships with their colonizers. 
Africa stands out in this respect. For nearly all of modern history extending into the present and the foreseeable future, Africa (an entire continent consisting of 54 countries) generally continues to be troubled, with more than half the countries considered to have a low HDI. In particular, much of mainland Africa continues to feel the effects of colonial history, while still being subject to exploitation when possible, from chocolates and diamonds to trade routes and debt traps: much of human progress has been built on a solid foundation of innumerable dark-skinned corpses. In any case, the average 'condition' of the African mainland continues to be heartbreaking, because the vast, majestic landscapes hold pockets of human suffering the developed world couldn't bear to read about. This is especially tragic, considering that these are now independent nations, and yet the people seem to have accepted this state of chronic degeneracy, constant war, social strife, foreign interference and exploitation, underlined by unbelievably regressive beliefs and brainless superstitions- Africa, the poorest continent on the planet, has fewer protests than America, the most powerful country in the world. Of course, there are plenty of reasons for this, from press freedom, to the fact that there is little room for revolutions when starvation is a concern. What effect does being a descendant of the cradle of civilization have on the psyche? "National history" is a meaningless term when you walk the same land that the first humans did.  

Trust nature to guide your actions, and trust your tribe to decide the consequences. This is the reality we are wired to manifest. Courts and constitutions are much like gold - they hold value because we agree they do, and we agree they do because we need them to fulfil certain roles in society. It stands to reason that the moment it becomes clear they are not doing so to the standards expected of them, placing value on them anyway declares there are no standards expected of them. I don't like gold. It is worthless to me.

I think every nation needs a civil war to decide what it needs to be. 

Psychiatry takes things quite a bit further. The current standard for diagnosing psychopathy (or APD) includes a whole host of qualities that are agreed to represent the typical constellation of symptoms for anti-social personality disorders, or borderline personality disorders. Formally, this is said to consist of four main facets, namely, interpersonal (charm,hubris,dishonesty,manipulative behavior), lifestyle(prone to boredom, lack of realistic long-term goals, impulsivity, irresponsibility), affective (lack of remorse or guilt, shallow or superficial emotions), and antisocial (poor behavioral control, criminal behavior).

. 
not only personal traits like superficial charm, hubris, manipulation, dishonesty, but also qualititative traits like proneness to boredom, lack of long-term goals, and generally ill-equipped to deal with emotions.

Superdeterminism is obviously true, if you define determinism correctly.. Imagine a little puff of smoke; every single particle of soot in that puff is subject to the same laws of physics that are known and understood, but it is still impossible to exactly predict the path it will take. I find the most basic argument convincing enough: if the universe has no 'magic', every event has a finite set of possible consequences, it itself could have only had one of a finite set of causes, whether microscopic or macroscopic or on quantum scales. Whether it can even be calculated doesn't matter either
