The problem of consciousness has been open for atleast a few thousand years. Recent years have seen some truly astounding breakthroughs in understanding the brain and its function, as well as great steps in our understanding 
of how its physical function gives rise to particular subjective experiences, but the moat between what the brain does, and what happens because of it, remains unscathed. This is frustrating, and a little humiliating, but 
also, and crucially, dangerous; our inability to understand and explain such a basic and ubiquitous part of the experience of being human, arguably our paramount purpose as a species, has seen entire cultures rise around 
particular interpretations of it.

Simultaneously, the recent media frenzy around large language models, and the subsequent debates about the likelihood of LLMs, or AI in general, suddenly becoming conscious (because we want sentient AI, and sentience requires 
consciousness), have shown that we are also quite willing to substantially diminish the definition of consciousness itself in order to make AI fit the definition. Of course, this is a fundamentally pointless exercise; the 
definition of consciousness, like the definition of every word in every language humans have ever developed, is a matter of agreement, and has no inherent cosmic importance. Therefore, we can play around with the definitions, 
but unless the underlying phenomenon are explained, well, nothing has been achieved. We know this, which is what makes the persistent debates about the definitions so frustrating; because we have not yet agreed on a solid 
definition or description of consciousness, what is considered to be part of it is a matter of opinion, so explaining this vague cloud of characteristics that include properties, behaviors, and our subjective experience 
of the consequences, is clearly impossible, as evidenced by a thousand years of failure.

The hard problem of consciousness, in my view, is hard precisely because of how ambitiously its scope is assumed, and how overbroad the problem is made to be. Suppose I wanted to explain flames. I know the physical basis of a 
flame; the volatiles and combustible particulates burn in atmospheric oxygen creating a stream of gas that is hot enough to glow in the visible range. However, my subjective experience of direct physical interactions 
involving contact, is invariably of painful burns. In fact, it doesn't matter what the flame looks like, or whether it even is visible - if I touch it, it will burn me. None of that, however, makes painful burns a property of 
flames, but merely a consequence of exactly one physical property of a flame, the temperature - interacting with our skin directly which first leads to whatever physical effects flames have on skin like blisters and melted 
skin, after which the nerves take over, and ultimately, the brain. This is where pain 'forms' and is felt, so the correct interpretation is to realize that the flame itself does little to actually create the pain, even though 
it is ultimately the root cause of this experience. The combustible particles are certainly very hot, but the reason we feel it in the first place is purely physical; thermodynamics demands uniform energy distribution across 
a system, so the moment our hands touch the flame, heat wants to travel into the hand, causing damage and pain. But the flame itself had nothing to do with it, and it is actually the fuel itself and the temperature it is 
burning at, that determines the temperature and the effect the flame will have on the body. To put simply: neither the burn, nor the pain, are truly a property of the flame.

This is, I claim, a somewhat silly analogy to the very real problem of including the effects and consequences of a process as a property of that process. For example, introspection is classically considered an 
integral, and arguably inseperable part of consciousness and the subjective experience of 'being'. This, however, is inaccurate - consciousness is certainly a part of it, but introspection is the combination of 
consciousness, with linguistic and analytical skills employed to analyze ones own behavior and mental state. If one were to remove the analytical and linguistics aspects of introspection, one would expect to be left with pure 
consciousness, and in this view, pure consciousness would simply be the facility of sensing the brain's state.

Finallly, a disclaimer: the general pattern of the arguments that follow will reply on liberal oversimplifications, overbroad generalizations and a very superficial, logical analysis. The result is not expected to be a description
of reality, and shouldn't be seen as such. Instead, the goal is simply to prompt fresh discussions from a different point of view, with the hope that a review of the problem statement itself might lead to some insights.


1. What are we dealing with?

We are trying to come up with a view of consciousness that is internally consistent, consistent with all our observations and experiences, and hopefully makes predictions that can be tested. Note that there still is no 
solution to the ultimate problem of actually testing for consciousness itself. I will attempt to argue that this is actually impossible within the following treatment of consciousness.

We start with a simple example of a sensory process that ends with subjective perception, such as sight. In its simplest and most accurate definition, sight is the perception of ambient electromagnetic radiation within a 
 certain range of frequencies. We know how this works; lenses focus ambient light onto the retina, which then sends electrical impulses into the brain. This is the end of the track, and we do not know what happens between 
 this point, and the subjective experience of this picture of reality that is known, internally. We can trace a purely physical process of perception until it reaches the brain, at which point, by 'some magic', this 
 perception becomes available as internalized information, even if transient. 

Going back to our definition of sight, as the perception of ambient electromagnetic radiation within a certain range of frequencies, we notice that while this is a complete and accurate definition of sight, the word 
 'perception' actually hides a lot of the complexity and mystery we associate with conscious subjective experience. In particular, what is 'perceived' is not what is actually captured by the eyes - the moment light hits the 
 retina, or sound hits the eardrum, or any other stimulus turns into an electrical impulse, we are for all intents and purposes, detached from reality; we must navigate our universe relying exclusively on the stories our 
 brain makes up. In fact, this reality is not even 'directly' available to the brain, which must make do with the electrical impulses which are not nearly 'consistent' enough to serve as a reliable signal (exactly identical 
 images do not cause exactly identical retinal impulses), seen within the context of what it has experienced in the past. The conscious perception of our surroundings, visual or otherwise, is the culmination of a rather 
 complex (inasmuch as we know little about it) computation involving the brain's past experiences with visual stimuli, within the context of its experiences and learned patterns considering all other senses, ending with a 
 nearly infallible guess of reality. Only the first step of this process has anything to do with actual reality; the rest is functionally identical to large language models - generate from a 'prompt' consisting of neural 
 impulses from sensory organs, based on patterns discovered in past 'experiences'. This picture is complete and accurate, until the point preceding the actual subjective experience. This is important; the entire process of 
 perception, functionally, is clearly separable into two parts. The first is what the brain does (note that we only need the what, not the how or why). The second, is the matter of the subjective experience. We do not want to 
 attach more properties to our view of consciousness unless we need to, because the larger the circle around what we consider consciousness, the harder it is to explain all its myriad aspects. So how simply can we define 
 consciousness, while preserving all properties that are commonly considered part of it? A very good candidate is simply "awareness of our internal state". This definition is vague, and leaves the burden of defining what 
 'awareness' is, and what constitutes an 'internal state'; but with a strictly colloqual reading, this is an accurate, if incomplete description of what most would agree constitutes consciousness.

Now consider the following: in typical non-pathological scenarios, the visual perception of the world must begin with organs that are specifically designed to sense light. The rest can be made up, but the initial prompt must be 
from a source that actually can sense reality. If we instead draw a larger box to capture everything that can be directly attributed to physical effects in the process of perception, namely, the light, the eyes, the nerves, 
the brain, and all the electrochemical activity that we know occurs, ending with this picture that we know the brain creates, the question of perception is therefore reduced to somehow, sensing this picture the brain has 
created. Further, this 'picture' is a catch-all for all we know the brain can do - thought, perception, emotional responses, and so on. Every aspect of our conscious, subjective experience of reality, everything we think, 
everything we see, hear, love, hate, anger, happiness, self-hate and ideas of self-harm, are ultimately pure creations of the brain. In addition, these creations are not tangible objects that are passed on to the magical 
agent of consciousness, but absolutely intangible events that cannot be separated into further steps(FUNCTIONALLY); we can discern no sequence of steps either in the creation of this picture itself, nor in the perception of 
this picture. In this abstract view, all of perception, emotion, and thought, therefore results in what can best be described as 'some' state of the brain. This state involves certain regions of the brain being active, 
certain neurons firing in specific ways in specific directions, a process too hopelessly complicated to actuallly track physically, but we only need to know that the brain has now gone from one state to another, the first being 
the moment preceding subjective experience, and the latter, during, with all the insanity taking place during the transition.

We know consciousness and subjective experience ultimately must have a physical origin, but we also know the subjective experience of reality is itself not physical. If we simply separate the physical, the universe and all 
the brain does, from the non-physical, what this results in internally, and force the same logic, that the perception of all physical stimuli requires some way of sensing it, then the brain's state must need a sensory organ 
as well. Resist any temptations to include the entire range of our subjective experiences and the 'magic' therein, poetry or love or whatever else, from what actually happens - burns are not a property of flames, but a 
consequence. From a purely functional perspective, it is reasonable to suggest that because the brain creates these intangible pictures of reality, pictures consisting of visuals, audio, smell, temperature, emotion - an agent 
that actually senses these states, collating all these diverse sources of information and the cryptic mess of electrical discharges, into some coherent picture of reality, which must then be 'available' as an actual picture, 
rather than a set of properties, like a photograph versus a list of RGB values.

Simultaneously, because the brain is ultimately incharge of nearly everything the body does (ignoring the specifics of the autonomous nervous system, for example, which involves the brain stem and the spine), it is sufficient 
for the brain to have some mechanism of turning these impulses into a 'known' picture of reality. In other words, a purely non-physical, that is, brain-generated 'sensory' system that can manage this effect will suffice, 
needing no additional hardware at all, neural or otherwise. Note that the claim is not that this is the correct picture of what goes on between the brain's actions and the effects on our subjective experience, but instead,
that even this oversimplified picture explains everything we observe. Further, in order to determine if this is possible at all, we only need to recognize the existence of software - purely 'abstract' entities with definite
physical origins, but abstracted to such an extent that direct correlations between the results and the physical causes are practically impossible to identify, even if they exist.
The brain, in this view, is comparable to a bare-metal computer, relying only on its internal physical and logical construction to perform actions that are 
determined by its physical state. The need for operating-systems in computing, is identical to the need for something resembling consciousness - a way to sense and interact with the hardware without needing to know the 
specifics of underlying physical events. It must be pointed out that conversely, not knowing or understanding the physical events underlying modern computing, is not a good reason to suggest that hypervisors or operating 
systems are conscious, sentient, intelligent, or a part of a unifying God-consciousness of which all virtual-machines are ultimately a part. 

To summarize, consciousness is effectively a 'software' sensory organ. Its sole and entire purpose is to 'sense' the brain's state as a coherent picture collating every aspect of this state. Note that there is absolutely no
intelligence, self-awareness, or volition to consciousness in this view, and this is justified in the following section.

One obvious question here, is why one is needed. This will be addressed in the final section of this essay. For the time being, noting that how and why, cause and reason, are distinct entites, the cause has a fairly simple
justification that is no different from the cause of any other trait we possess. 
To clarify, this is not the same as how it came to be, which has a fairly convenient justification. 
There are certainly a whole mess of retroactive explanations using some evolutionary logic, but the only fact of importance here is that evolution and natural selection do not 
actually select for the 'best' anything, whether physically or functionally; there is no qualititave comparision between different mutations that result in different behaviors and capacities. All natural selection is, is a 
matter of what allows an individual to live long enough to reproduce. Further, what happens to the individual after reproduction is entirely irrelevant from this perspective, and the entire process of natural selection 
simplifies to a race between death and reproduction. Further, the traits that persist do not need to actually produce any practical benefits; as long as they do not hurt the population's chances of reproducing to produce 
healthy offspring, they will persist. If there are mutations introduced, the individuals with mutations that hurt these chances will reproduce less (whether qualitatively or quantitatively) than the ones that do not, but most 
traits that persist in populations, especially as the context and circumstances diverge from the conditions that could have favoured those traits, it is possible to have superbly complex traits that offer absolutely no clear 
benefit. In fact, given that it is possible for bare-metal computers to exist, or even purely analog circuitry that can be designed to perform a wide range of tasks, it is atleast not necessary to be conscious, to be 
functional and competitive on an evolutionary scale. However, as all mutations that form the core of evolutionary progressions in species, are ultimately arbitrary - mutations are not chosen by the species - once 'some' 
rudimentary mechanism for sensing the state of the brain emerges, it only has to not pose a disadvantage to persist. On the other hand, the moment this becomes and inheritable trait, it allows for serious jumps in complexity 
of the underlying computer, in exactly the same way that the operating systems allow for elegant control of monstrously complicated hardware which would most likely be practically impossible otherwise.
Therefore, the very initial 'how', from an evolutionary perspective, is almost universally "by lucky accident".

We now explore a model that forms a convenient framework for viewing consciousness as a 'convenience' for the brain.


2. The monkey in the safe.

As discussed previously, we know the picture of reality that the brain makes up, is absolutely independent of both consciousness (which we have defined as the sense of the brain's internal state) and reality itself. Further, 
just as every physical stimulus we encounter must first be sensed directly, so must the physical state of the brain. The conscious perception of a self is merely the 'knower' invented to facilitate this process of 'knowing'. 
This might sound convoluted, but to start with, we can definitely say the brain is 'capable' of inventing this subjective self, so raw processing-power is no concern. In fact, if this 'knower', the subjective self, is seen as 
the whole identity of a person, stemming from a convenience-construction of the brain, while the typical function involves one identity that forms the center of the individual's life, the brain is actually capable of doing 
this several times over, with several distinct, and functionally 'complete' identities, as seen in patients with dissociative identity disorder. Schizophrenia, on the other hand, suggests that it is not only possible, but is 
nearly a rule, that any picture of reality that the brain invents, 'feels' real to the subjective self, as the same hardware that created the picture also created the agent that can perceive it. Crucially, there is absolutely 
no need for this subjective experience to have any bearing or basis in objective reality to feel subjectively valid, which is why telling a patient with schizophrenia that their particular hallucinations are not 'real' does 
little to help them, nor does them knowing change the occurence of these hallucinations. That is, this is not a problem of incorrect information - the presence of information that suggests the picture of reality under 
question is inaccurate, does not actually affect the picture at all. In fact, mental illnesses, especially those that involve one or more functional parts of the brain in overdrive, serve as a reminder of what the hardware is 
actually capable of, and more importantly, how quickly things go out of control when the hardware malfunctions.

The important thing to note here, is that what is sensed must significantly deviate from what is 'expected' before one can comment on the accuracy of the brain's picture of reality. The brain, and the consciousness that 
senses it, are operating with the same facts. All the linguistic, imaginative, emotive, and analytical capabilities the brain together created this picture, which is why delusions and deeply held beliefs are rarely 
self-correctable. (I only say rare because I do not want to rule it out altogether).

Imagine a monkey in a locked safe. One of the walls has a television screen. This is its ONLY stimulus. It has no other way of interacting with the world outside the safe, and in fact, it has no way of knowing of the
existence of a world beyond the walls of the safe.

The monkey has NO control over what shows up on the screen. What is displayed on the screen is totally controlled by 'something' the monkey can know nothing about. The monkey can only react to what is on the screen, but its 
reactions are irrelevant to the operator of the screen. The monkey's job, in essence, is to watch the screen, and 'feel' whatever these pictures result in. If, hypothetically, a question were posed to the 
monkey-television-operator system, for example, "Pick a number", the operator, by 'some' unknown mechanism, makes a selection, and shows it on the screen. Until this point, even though a response is ready, it is effectively a 
'non-liquid' asset, and for all intents and purposes, useless. This, however, changes when the monkey sees the screen - the decision that was already made in the past, now 'feels' like a current, and personal decision, because 
the monkey is only meant to 'feel'. In other words, irrespective of what information is synthesized and/or stored in the brain, it only becomes 'known' when the consciousness-monkey perceives it on the screen.

There is no way to test any of this, atleast not until we can test for the presence consciousness itself. However, we can make some predictions about the implications of this 'dumb' consciousness that can hopefully rule out
inconsistencies and inaccuracies.

To start with, if consciousness is merely sensory, possessing no intelligence of its own, not only must one be unable to perform any intelligence task 'deliberately', one must be absolutely locked out of any attempts and 
controlling the brain's tv schedule for the day. Further, because the monkey has no way of knowing a world outside the safe exists, and because it possess no inherent intellect of its own, as far as the monkey is concerned, 
the television screen is its entire world, looking inwards. Thus, because one has no way of influencing, or even perceiving the processes that actually generate thoughts, and because the conscious self, the monkey in the 
safe, ONLY sees the thoughts fed to it, and crucially, cannot separate itself from the screen, the conduit through which thoughts appear, its assessment of its own role as not merely the perceiver, but the progenitor of 
thought, would be understandable. Incorrect, but understandable. Think of a number. Why that number, out of the infinitely many others? If your answer was "I don't know", think about this for a moment. You were posed a simple 
question; an answer was formed, and if it were a verbal conversation, you would likely have said it aloud too, without ever knowing why that particular number; your brain can hold a conversation, make your tongue and lips do 
all the right things to form the right words to put its point across, without ever requiring control or even thought, and if you have said something you immediately regreted, ask yourself if you truly were in the drivers seat 
in the moment you said it, or were you on a sort of 'autopilot', simply watching passively as the words flew out of your mouth, and you had to hear them aloud to realize what you'd just said?. This, I claim, is because the 
self-aware, conscious aspect of ourselves is simply not involved in this process at all in any capacity beyong an exclusively passive observer. 

The same argument applies to every single thought, emotion, and internal experience we ever have; the pattern of perception of the brain's state after all the requisite processing has been done, is, I claim, without exception 
- every thought and emotion we have is not a creation of our conscious self, but the perception of the electrochemical activity of the brain. The monkey sees the screen, only the screen, and nothing but the screen; the monkey 
knows the screen, only the screen, and absolutely nothing except the screen. The feeling of having deliberately and voluntarily generated the thought is merely a cosmetic introduction, and otherwise purely illusory; the 
brainless consciousness-monkey has no intelligence to even make claims about being the progenitor of these mental events, but because the brain actually is, and the same brain runs the television screen, it is reasonable to 
suggest that the brain would past "I created these thoughts" on the screen, and the monkey would read, perceive, internalize the exact same sentiment - "I created these thoughts", lacking the intelligent to use the second 
person to refer to the brain. (This is obviously overly anthropomorphized; there is no monkey in the brain, but there are arguments that can be made to justify this - arguments that even if incorrect, are still consistent 
with observation). Specifically, there is a finite and non-zero time difference that has been studied in different contexts (motor control, and the difference between the decision to move ones hand and the conscious 
recognition of this decision and then the actual movement, the findings being the decision happens first, before perception or action), and I believe this straightforward to observe. First, we cannot predict our thoughts even 
30 seconds in the future, as the operator's programming is a show that starts at birth and ends at death, inextricably linked to its own past experiences, its interpretation of these past experiences, its current 
circumstances, its interpretation of its current circumstances, and all the errors that pile up at every step of this process. Second, try determining the source of the next thought that pops in your mind; you will find that 
generally, this is a mystery, but the administration has been set up so well this does not register as a problem at all. If this is indeed true, we must expect intelligence, emotional response, and a persons entire body of 
thought and internal monologue, to be ultimately beyond their control.

Further, Any realization of ones own shortcomings, and any epiphanies about needing to fix them, are also
products of the same television operator's whims, and are also beyond their control. If the brain happens to generate thoughts pertaining to self-improvement, this will feel like introspection to the perception-monkey, but 
this is in reality yet another manifestation of a fairly elaborate and sophisticated setup that consistently makes one feel like they are in control. The monkey is entirely at the mercy of the television operator, and the 
television operator has the tools to prompt the entire spectrum of human internal experience; love, loss, anger, misery, joy, indifference, sexual arousal - all emotions we feel and are familiar with, but clearly beyond our 
control.

Further still, if the above is true, any significant change in the brain's psychological behavior, if it is to be achieved without physical or chemical manipulations, requires an external agent or tool to actually affect this 
change - the monkey has no control over the television, and the brain relies on external cues in combination with its own programming to determine even the broad topics it approaches. Therefore, the only real options 
available here in order to affect these changes, require either the brain to generate these ideas and initiate these actions, which is purely a matter of chance and circumstance, OR, an external agent to influence said chance 
an circumstance. For these reasons, external stimuli represent the only direct route to changing psychology, and why it is exceedingly rare for individuals to be able to reverse negative patterns of thought or emotion, 
obsessions, addictions, and so on. In fact, this is valid even for the most banal mental events we observe; try to compute 37*39 mentally, without a pen and paper, and analyze how this works. I claim that computations of this 
sort, or analysis in general, involves not actively and consciously 'solving' the problem at hand, but instead waiting until a step presents itself on the screen. Until this point, all one can do is to wait, turning the 
problem over and around, trying different strategies, different perspectives, none of which are voluntarily chosen, but instead, strictly observed AFTER the brain has produced these ideas. In fact, if the above picture is 
accurate, it should be strictly impossible to get the brain to do anything at all. (The meaninglessness of this is evident from the sentence itself - there is nothing available to 'get things done' if the brain is left out of 
this equation - the brain can make itself do things, but it doesn't take requests from the consciousness-mokney. Our conscious self is controlled by the brain, not the other way around)
 claim what we consider 'intelligence' is actually a measure the brain's ability to generate relevant ideas that fit best given a particular problem, and the rate at which it can do so. Therefore, situations that involve some 
form of intellectual competition, are essentially like chicken fights - the conscious self has no influence, and you sit there hoping the brain, the chicken, does well. Further, one cannot become more smarter, for the most 
part atleast; education and practice definitely could lead to improved mental capabilities, but this is again a matter of trying to train the television operator, in the hope that they will now be capable of more accurate 
programming on the screen - but this is no guarantee, and in fact, is a total failure most of the time. This extension actually applies equally well to all human internal experience, and our general powerlessness against the 
cruelty of our own brain's emotional and illogical responses to situations that do not deserve it. Anxiety, depression, rage, and other such debilitating (or atleast, result in total loss of control) are known to be a 
consequence of a combination of neurobiological and psychological causes, and crucially, rarely self-correctable. This is obvious, because the wishes of the conscious self go nowhere - it is not just that they will stay 
unfulfilled, the fact is there is no one listening - the television screen does not carry the monkey's messages to the operator. If we step back from this line of argument, we can see another aspect of this idea. Because the 
brain (the operator) is known to be primarily a creature of habit, being essentially a lump of meat with the right hardware at birth, to learn patterns of thought and behavior over the child's growth. This means any further 
purely psychological (as opposed to chemical or electrical interventions) 'modification' of the operator's behavior, must necessarily come from outside; as far as ones own identity and sense of self is concerned, this 
'internal monologue' is not the monkey talking to itself, but the monkey reading the operator's internal monologue, and believing it to be its own. Because the operator is the only one talking, any ideas, whether 
self-destructive or self-constructive, are all part of the operator's endless podcast. The conscious self has no hope of being heard by the operator, let alone being taken seriously, so reconstructions of any learned patterns 
must originate outside the brain, and must be specifically directed at fixing patterns, disrupting unhealthy patterns that have been reinforced over time without the monkey's participation. The conscious identity is 
absolutely powerless, so will power, determination, and a genuine will to change oneself, DO NOT exist unless the brain generates them, and the brain will not do so on its own unless supplanted by external mechanisms that 
directly deal with the operator.


3. WHY?

As stated earlier, the cause for the existence of consciousness has a boilerplate explanation. The why, technically, is unnecessary (the universe needs no reason, nor is there anything to reason with), but it is possible to invent
a perspective within which these behaviors can be more productively understood. A few ideas are suggested here to spur discussions on the back-end of the above described mechanisms. 
So here is the question: what is the brain supposed to be doing, exactly? 
 
I propose the following: the core duty of the brain is to maximize predictability. There are obvious individual, social and evolutionary advantages to having predictable surroundings, and forms the main justification for the 
evolution of territorial behavior in animals - theoretically speaking, this marked territory forms the zone of absolute predictability. If this is true, if there is some inherent control system designed to maximize 
predictability, it must be capable of 1. seek out unpredictable or unknown situations, and 2. make them predictable. In practice, this must manifest as some postive reward for finding such ill-understood situations, and a 
punishment for avoiding them. I argue, with only the slightest confidence, that boredom and thrill-seeking are the results of this feedback mechanism. We enjoy thrilling, 'scary' situations, enough to actively seek them out - 
the brain rewards this, and we feel good, as long as the experience remains novel. Once the experience is understood, once the brain knows what happens next, boredom quickly sets in - the brain has figured this situation out, 
there is no danger, so it must move on to understanding other places that need to be made predictable. Curiosity is therefore hardwired, and so is the maddening irritation that boredom can lead to. The function of the 
conscious self, then, is simply to 'feel' these rewards and punishments, in conjuction with the consequent physical effects like elevated heart rates or dilated pupils, as the brain itself is incapable of feeling. Further, 
any attempts to exploit this inherent attraction to the unexpected must either display something truly unexpected, or must insert sufficient 'danger signals' into the known and predictable to get a reaction. The latter has 
formed the main strategy of news media worldwide; as wars, death, disease and poverty become boring (because the brain has now learnt to expect them), a media house must highlight these horrors more and more aggressively, 
with more and more graphic detail, to get the brain interested at all. It is a matter of fact that the past decade has seen mushrooming news agencies claiming to cater to every political orientation imaginable. in this 
competitive landscape, competition is actually for 'attention', and everyone, from news media to instagrammers and tiktokers are fighting for this attention. As each 'new' trend comes by, percolates through social strata and 
ultimately falls away once it gets boring (like fidget spinners - even fidgety people got bored of them), new ones must constantly strive to be evermore provocative than the previous ones that will no longer have the same 
effect. More blood, more nudity, more conflict - these are attempts to overload the brains dismissal of "yeah I know this, it's been going on for ages", and make it pay attention again. In the absence of truly 'new' news, 
this is the only strategy left. The lesson in this argument, if there is one, is not that media today must be forgiven for the shit they push. The lesson is that the current state of our world, the media, and our own 
reactions to them, is an inevitable consequence of the journey we started thousands of years ago; each machine we built, each road we laid, every invention and discovery to make our lives reliably safe - predictably safe - is 
truly boring, once the initial rush fades. We are wired to keep seeking the new, and as the amount of 'new' shrinks, we must either find new problems to solve, or get comfortable with the consequences of an entirely 
predictable life. We will run out of 'new', atleast on our planet. There may be millions of undiscovered species, but that problem will solve itself in a few decades as climate change takes out these specialized species that 
cannot survive outside a very narrow set of conditions. The effects of climate change will infuse some excitement in many people, I suppose, but I think that would depend on when the start; we are already seeing some global 
fatigue around discussions related to climate change, for the same reasons - we've been making the same arguments for about thirty years, and we are bored of them. Fifty years from now, we may simply be too bored and detached 
from reality to save our own lives, like Calhoun's rats. What can you do? The monkey has no control. Even as I write this, my conscious self is merely reading the words as they are typed out - I am not consciously deciding 
each word - my brain has decided what it wants to say, including this sentence. I am just watching.

