Utopia.


Introduction.


This book is a collection of my ideas and opinions in no particular order or consistent style. There is some hope of this turning into a collection of essays, but it has a fair chance of turning into an unhinged rant. I aim 
to be high on marijuana throughout the writing of this book. I am quite baked now. This is the only way - otherwise, sober pragmatism dictate that this is a pointless waste of energy, and I will obey. My original intention 
was a ‘classical’ non-fiction book, with a beginning, a middle and an end, with well thought-out and well-researched arguments, all in service of a few overarching ideas that must be shown to be true. However, not only do I 
have no interest in spending the time and energy to research, but such a journey would itself be futile; curiosity mixed with marijuana equals infinite rabbit holes. At this point, you should be immediately skeptical. Any 
argument made with limited information has commensurately limited chances of being correct, if at all. I do have what I believe is a good reason to write an entire book with deliberate intellectual handicaps. Most people in 
the world are not experts.

Today’s intellectual landscape suggests with good reason that more and more issues that were until very recently within the reach of the average person, are no longer so. Until what seems to me like just a few years ago, 
practically every discussion on our major concerns today either started off with, or were reviewed by experts, who spent many years of their lives studying these issues in greater depth and breadth than the average person 
could hope to without reorienting their lives around it. This was recognized and acknowledged, and most people did not go so aggressively counter to accepted wisdom or the considered opinions of experts purely out of spite. 
At some point in the recent past, this has changed. The root of this problem is the simple fact that we cannot agree on who the correct expert is. We have reached a stage in technological and cultural evolution where most of 
our problems have no clear solution. This would seem innocuous until one realises that most experts also have only one topic of expertise, and expertise in one subject does not imply expertise, or commensurate competence, or 
even the capacity for commensurate competence in a different subject. This means as far as one considers purely the amount of knowledge involved in the forming of an informed opinion, an expert in quantum physics is no 
different from anyone else when faced by an expert on political science in a discussion on politics. Therefore, absent evidence of competence, one must treat a quantum physicist’s opinion on politics no more seriously than 
anyone who isn’t a political scientist.

This is compounded by the sheer number of issues today that insist they are the dominant crisis facing the world, each ‘voice’ that we gave public platforms to in good faith screaming louder and louder just to be heard. 
Social media, for all its aspirations of giving ‘voices’ to the voiceless, has not changed much - global discourse has gone from relative silence to absolute cacophony, because in spite of the aforementioned issue of 
expertise in the face of bodies of knowledge that have grown exponentially over the past few decades, the way we treat public discourse regarding ‘voices’ is underlined by the simple-minded feel-good idea that every voice is 
equally deserving of the right to public expression. While that is a noble sentiment indeed, even the most basic analysis would show this is simply not true. Simultaneously, we also find ourselves in a state where the 
selection for prominence (and consequently the selection of the dominant voices in public discourse, and therefore, the drivers of social sentiment to whatever extent) is arbitrary in the best case, and based on pure 
entertainment value in the most frequent. In addition, we have also assigned the deeply powerful title of the Influencer to some of the most vapid collections of privileged stupidity in meat form, because we have a tacit 
consensus that an influencer is simply one who is popular enough to influence purchase habits. Simply put, the prerequisite body of knowledge one needs to familiarise with today to have a qualified opinion on any subject is 
almost comically massive, and yet not only do we rarely follow expert views, but most expert views never reach the public, because we have preferred more entertaining people to have the microphone.

While there has been extensive analyses on how we got here, there seems to be little effort made to fix the situation. To be clear, I do not believe simply ‘going back to the good old days’ that conservatives claim will be 
the cure to all our ills is a solution. Part of the reason our solutions don’t lie in the past, because not only did the past have its own problems, the social order that was agreed upon was a consequence of the circumstances 
of the time, which were significantly different to today. At the same time, the unbridled all-in pursuit of rudimentary emotional comfort, or even its choice as the primary determinant of our choices for social norms, has 
resulted in the same lack of self-control one would expect in a discourse that is led by emotion rather than an interest in correctness. As a result, we now see a world that by all apparent evidence, insists that practically 
everyone has chosen one extreme or the other, and simply refuses to acknowledge the presence of the silent majority, the ‘centrists’ and the moderates, the people who see that the extremes of both camps today (right/left for 
the sake of brevity) are behaviorally the same - extremes tend to inevitably come to the belief that the ends justify the means, which in turn leads to the age-old rationalisations regarding sacrifice, and the idea that 
crucifying a few people is necessary if just to send a message. As of the moment of writing of this book, we are currently dealing with furious arguments(with no obvious resolution) on sexual/cultural/national/ethnic 
minorities and their rights to a dignified life, healthcare, taxes on the rich, privacy, AI, poverty, several formal and informal armed conflicts on ethnic, national or cultural grounds, several border skirmishes, a full 
scale invasion, and several minor players threatening war. In the backdrop lie several existential threats, like the general rise of anger, anxiety and depression across ethnicities, sexes and genders, growing resentment 
towards governments, a growing wave of populist nationalism now starting to show its fascist undertones of a general attraction to ‘purges’, growing distrust for science and academics, a growing tendency to aggressively 
pursue conspiracy theories, a total disappearance of the line between experts and laymen, a breakdown of the fundamental cohesion between social groups, a growing tendency to be hyper-territorial about their tribes, and of 
course, climate change. At the same time, our ability to have a rational discussion without descending into emotionally charged screaming has nearly vanished. To me, the current world seems doomed, with a generation waiting 
to take office that seems so impulsive, thin-skinned and detached from reality as to be entirely unfit for office, and an incumbent set of holders of political office that are unable to come to grips with the fact that their 
worldviews are obsolete, often entirely meaningless, and displaying with more and more regularity a reluctance to leave their position at the end of their term. Academics and experts can manage little, because there is also a 
growing percentage of our species that is not just sceptical of, but is actively against science, and even the fundamental concept of expertise. We are all miserable and losing our minds, the planet itself is dying out one 
species at a time, the people in office do not understand the people on the streets and are busy playing geopolitical scrabble, and the people on the streets simply have other things to do. There are no authorities, there is 
no statement or collection of evidence that can change anyone’s mind today. We no longer care about being right. What IS right anyway?






Through whatever set of decisions, based on whatever reasons, over the span of whatever number of centuries/millennia, we are currently in a state that is demonstrably not in our best interests. Now consider the following 
questions: Is there any way out? Or has the sun begun to set on our species? If so, what would a solution involve, what would it require, and what would it actually achieve? What IS the solution we should aspire for?

The remainder of this book will outline my arguments for a few of my core beliefs starting with some claims that I believe to be universally acceptable, and will (hopefully) lead into my propositions for solutions to the 
above problems. To be clear, there are solutions, and quite simple ones too - appreciating that simple does not mean easy.

In fact, I claim that most people will find it easy to immediately come up a few ways of exiting this stalemate, as long as practicality is not a concern. I claim that there is NO practical solution to our current state, and 
things will continue to get worse until we reach a total breakdown of social order - and I have good reasons to believe so too, which I will describe in a later chapter. Therefore, any thought experiments concerning the 
subject of our future of our species, and the question of whether we even have one, are ultimately recreational activities. In celebration of this ultimate pointlessness, I shall attempt a formula consisting of approximately 
50% nihilism, 30% bitter truth, and 20% blind speculation.

Here are a few things you must understand and agree to before you continue reading.

Absolutely no part of this book should be taken seriously - unless you find a compelling argument or undeniable evidence is supplied. The latter will be rare in this book, the former will be a passionate aspiration. When 
neither is possible, I will try to specify my recognition of this fact. If I leave no disclaimers, and supply no evidence or good arguments for a claim, use your best judgement. I have some education. But

Now - I am part of the silent minority. As far as I am concerned, my only goal in life is my own peace and happiness. I want to have a quiet life surrounded by nature, living off the land. Every participant in this global 
civil war (hyperbole for sure, but it serves my purpose) is an impediment to this goal. As long as I live within the civilised world, I am no longer given any true choice regarding my participation in these myriad issues. 
Pick a side, and one becomes the enemy of the other side; pick none, and one becomes the enemy of both sides. And thus we find ourselves in this strange deadlock, where the extremes are too often occupied by hyper-emotional 
loudmouths, while centrists are folding in on themselves out of a combination of nihilism and disgust. For the vast majority of the 8 billion-ish people alive today, everyone who contributes to this endless cacophony of 
competing opinions is little more than a nuisance, for the simple reason that achieving a particular result does not seem to be a real goal. I will expand on this later, so please shelve your misgivings until then. One might 
be tempted to suggest that the root of the entire problem therefore is emotions winning over reason. This cannot be the full truth. The disapproving pronouncement that “Emotion has trumped reason” occurs with astounding 
frequency over the span of human history. As a species, we have known of this tendency for a long, long time, and we recognized its potential to be a serious impediment to our fundamental ability to even stand each other a 
long time ago too. Why then, do we keep falling into the same black hole of stupidity?

I believe the real reason is trivially simple - even with all our technological, social and cultural sophistication, we have quietly abandoned any attempts at true self-analysis as a distant observer. There are, I believe, 
certain human habits that occur, despite our absolute distaste for it, with clockwork regularity in the constellation of activities that humans participate in. These are habits that have been getting quietly reinforced for 
tens of thousands of years, or even millions of years if one takes into account the overlap in our most vile actions with other mammals. In addition, there is also the abandonment of quasi-spiritual pursuits like dedicating 
time to understand our own selves, and how our minds actually function as an individual entity, how it seems to differ from others, and most importantly, finding the internal line that separates our ‘thoughts’ and ‘feelings’ 
from our ‘self’. For a brief period, the explosive growth of philosophy, arts and science around the renaissance transformed the world in a few centuries into a world of readers - that did not last long, and we quickly 
regressed back to our original state of being empty reaction-machines. Any attempt to change our collective direction, whether intellectually or culturally, must have a healthy respect for this fact, and the corollary 
understanding that when battling tendencies that have been wired into us via evolution, one must fundamentally rethink their expectations of the timescales over which this successful transformation will occur. The problem we 
face today is the lack of any consistent system that will allow us to evaluate this information (or choose not to), without relying on abstract speculation based on shaky foundations. There is already a growing call for a 
return to the ‘old ways’, with more and more people subscribing to the idea that things were better when religion ruled people’s minds, and thus made society predictable, even if undesirable. There is certainly merit in this 
idea;. After all, a predictable system that gives predictably incorrect results is preferable to an unpredictable system that sometimes gets things right. Surely there must be a better way. I find deeply unsettling, the idea 
that as a species we are doomed to either structure our lives around imaginations and speculations, or perish in the flood of nonsense we feel so compelled to contribute to everyday. And nonsense it surely is; I do not see a 
single public concern today that could not have been solved and settled for good centuries ago. It is not just the quality of arguments and ideologies that have deteriorated, there has been a substantial decline in the 
severity of problems that we are currently losing our collective minds about. To be clear, I do not see any way out of this situation. Actually, I claim there is no peaceful way out of this mess; we evolved for physical 
dominance as much as for intellectual dominance, and unlike an argument, a fight is always decisive.  That said, I claim there is one foundational problem ,that if solved, would likely leave us better equipped to deal with 
everything else, which is as follows:

For an average person (taken across our species), with little formal education or vocational expertise, little education in science, understanding of philosophy or interest in literature, or generally, the arguments, findings 
and conclusions of previous generations, is it at all possible for one to navigate this chaos with any measure of elegance and intellectual honesty? Are people without education or expertise, people without exposure to 
philosophy or the habit of exploring ones own mind without religious aids, simply cursed to be like kites without strings, being influenced by any every politician or salesman that comes their way, every video trend, every 
forwarded text, every 255 character tweet? Note that I recognize, and in fact, allude to the fact that there is now little distinction made between an expert and a lay person - the rules that determine an aspiring public 
figure’s selection for prominence are increasingly arbitrary or at best transient, and has left the question of a person’s ‘expertise’ simply a matter of opinion. This is not a new question, and I believe most people see it 
implicitly asked in society. I believe societies as a general rule have cycles of rapid progress, stagnation, frustration, and regression; we are currently in the third phase, and as is often the case, one of the hallmarks of 
this period is the resentment towards intellectualism, who are seen simultaneously as failures for not having provided the world they promised, and as bigots, for the contempt that is often shown towards the less 
intellectually sophisticated. Obviously, the only just response to this contempt often is contempt in return, and thus as in every other matter of friction in our global society, the bigotry flows both ways. I claim it is. 
The remainder of this book will consist of various issues that I find interesting, the current arguments for and against some strategies of overcoming them, and my own personal views on the subject. In particular, I will 
focus on certain unreasonable and often insane assumptions that we rely on today, that we really should abandon.



I thank Jordan Peterson for this book. His popularity has been inversely proportional to his mental capacity, and it was the ever effusive comments under his most violently stupid speeches that finally spurred me to write 
this book. Jordan, remember: for something to seem complex to you, it only has to be too complex for you.

Chapter 1:

Notes on the boundaries of our aspirations.

I am, by my nature, attracted to chaos. I find it simply more interesting than order. There has never been a time in my life when I felt differently. In particular, I enjoy the feeling of watching events unfold without my 
intervention. I think this is part of the reason why I have a particular interest in rules that are ‘inevitable’ - that is, rules that can be The presence of our faculty of self-awareness is an interesting question, of subtle 
practical importance. To me, it is clear that I can live an entire day without spending a single second thinking about myself. Put differently, the part of my brain that makes me ‘me’, does not need to be involved in the 
process of life at all, and indeed, as stated earlier, one only needs to follow the instructions that the brain posits, in a sort of ‘autopilot’, as in a machine that simply is not actively self-aware. Therefore, conscious 
self-awareness seems to be an entirely unnecessary presence in our being. Despite all the passionate arguments from both spiritualists and materialists about the nature of consciousness, the fact still remains that we do not 
know how it has come to exist, or how it works, and most importantly, what it is supposed to achieve at all - note that survival is not a human quality, nor is ‘progress’, inasmuch as with all our progress, we are far more 
miserable as a species than any other animal that lives apparently with no self-awareness.


NOTES: 1. Cherry-colored Funk by the Cocteau Twins makes me feel an emotion that has no name. It has a definite physical component to it. The first time I heard it, it was unexpected. Every hair on my body stood on end, tears 
welled in my eyes without warning, the skin on my head felt like it had been dipped in ice, and for a few brief moments during the chorus, my sense of self, even my sense of being, vanished without a trace, and all that was 
left was an amorphous cloud of pure amazement. Everyone has felt this at times, and everyone knows exactly what I describe. It is either strange, or obvious, that we have no word for it. We have several words for the area of 
the body between the anus and the genitals. 2. ass end of true heartfelt romance.
