I watched a video the other day.
It was a video of three people watching another video. 
The other video was of a gay proposal. So the three people were watching a video of a gay
proposal. I don't know how this happened.
In the proposal video, one of the guys, of the couple (long sigh) was leading a dance
troupe of about ten people in what looked like a warehouse filled with plywood and some half-finished cupboards. There were people in the video, on camera, holding cameras to record the cameras that were recording the dance. On the left foreground stood an old couple that did not dance, but instead stood there laughing aggressively at the groom in the suit, the groom that was leading the dance troupe.
(sigh).
There were three bored-looking children placed in the forefront, and an empty chair next to them. I don't know what this meant, but the look on one of the children, a sort of 
playful rebelliousness just shy of criminal behavior, clearly the sort of person who would ask you if your food tasted funny, smile and walk away suggestively, unleashing the brain-bug that will now keep whispering "maybe he shat in your food" for the next few days, the sort of person that enjoys inflicting mild psychological torment for recreational reasons like a cat casually breaking off a cockroach's legs, slowly, lazily, almost indifferently, one at a time, and eventually would just leave it there limbless, to slowly die of starvation or crushed by an unsuspecting foot...it seemed like it was a political statement, but maybe I am reading too much into it. 
Another of the three children was holding up a tablet pc with a video either of a canyon or anal sex, I couldn't tell, it was too small.
There were nearly fifty people, in three long lines extending into the back wall of 
the warehouse. The last few rows looked barely human. That's probably why they were 
put there. All the others, the groom and the groom included, looked like actors in an 
insurance advertisement, almost too human, brighter smiles, smoother skin, thicker 
hair, greener grass, redder tiles, taller trees, bigger biceps and tits, and as the 
drone camera does a final summarizing sweep of the house signifying the holistic 
nature of their coverage options, and finally lands on a closeup of the family, the 
each go into their respective character-specific poses... the dad stands with a goofy 
smile because most dads are either evil or silly and an evil dad would probably count 
as a preexisting condition for some providers; you know, I suspect the goofy dad character is a deliberate transformation most men in traditional households undergo - I am glad things are changing, though I am not sure what they are changing into, but boys grow up with the same lies as girls do as they go through the educational meatgridner - only theirs never becomes true; finish 10th grade, the rest of your life is just coasting, finish 12th well, the rest is a picnic, do your entrances well, the rest of your life is basically set at this point, undergrad, now masters thanks to educational inflation, and then you start working - and sometimes I do wonder why women ever wanted to work, I would happily be a housewife; in most countries that is a guaranteed livelihood, including if the earning husband fucks off - he has to keep you fed and your needs met anyway, because you are his responsibility whether you are married or not; this isn't a political statement, but a pragmatic one - statistically, the average housewife's atleast in current modern society, can be difficult, sometimes even cruel, but the average day is merely horrifyingly boring, but ultimately, set and secure; set duties mostly all in a very small geographical location, requiring relatively travel, and frequently allowing the liberal perusal of other entertainment while performing said duties - humans evolved to value stability and predictability, and for most housewives, this is met as well as can be expected from the person they've chosen to marry; again, average - much of the middle east and many parts of India have one extreme, and we are still trying to figure out the other extreme - we have reached marrying the Eiffel Tower so far, but we'll see; anyway, while it isn't a competition and equality is better seen as equity of misery, and a happy couple is one that is equally miserable; the point is, there is an undeniable difference of around nine hours spent working for someone else, the same nine hours basically a playground with chores interspersed in; I wonder if working women truly, deep in their hearts, enjoy working. I suppose it is the same for every human - work is fun as long as it's a choice; I can understanding enjoying 'the work', interesting projects are basically cocaine for me too, but philosophically speaking, every employee is a rental investment for a company - you having rented out yourself for about nine hours a day; and it only makes sense for the company to spend money on you if the value you bring in is greater than what you cost..on the other hand, you are a business yourself, your product being yourself; you have rented yourself out for a certain rate, creating more value than you charge, so in a way, every single employee in the world spends their entire life operating at a loss; and as a man in a traditional household, this is what the promised land of 'smooth sailing' is, until atleast sixty - operating at a loss for about 40 years, 9 hours a day, five days a week, approximately a third of your life operating at a loss; it does not take long for this realization to set in, I think; glass ceiling or not, I think this realization always finds even the most stupid eventually, the ones who truly believe the workplace is where the 'other family' lives, the ones that truly believe the profile descriptions they put up on linkedin - passionate, tireless, ha ha my flaw is once I start work I forget about everything else entirely, I forget my medication, my mother's medication, the slice of potato with a slice of cheese between one regular slice and one crusty end bit slice of bread that I left on the stove forty minutes ago, I will miss weddings and funerals for an all-hands meeting, I would rather let my entire family burn than let a project miss its deadline, I will let my friends fall away one by one, my cousins don't remember my name, my mother says I look older each time she sees me days apart, because I am a professional, a workaholic, not working on expensive and complex projects that are truly pointless in a cosmic scale while feeling my brain necrotize and fall away uselessly as the job is basically muscle memory at this point, literally drives me nuts, and by the way the customer is God and I will let them ass rape if they want to because customer satisfaction is number one priority sir (only until they've paid, of course - the first company I worked for was a cybersecurity startup, a very small shop, the CEO, CTO, COO, three interns, about twenty engineers, a product manager, a sales manager/executive/something, they made up their own titles I think, all basically sitting within fart-detecting distance of each other, both physically and psychologically. Now the C suite was basically the core founders having distributed the roles among themselves. These people were old peers and colleagues, having known and worked with each other over decades, each supremely accomplished. Anyway, the COO died of tuberculosis. This was completely unexpected, and everyone was shocked.
We all gathered in the conference room to honor his memory. A few said some nice things, then everyone stood in sombre silence for two minutes. Then we went back to work, and never spoke of him again. At the time, this bothered me, despite knowing it was a perfectly normal reaction - if my barber died, I would just go to a different barbershop. The point is, emotional attachment to your company or your job is good as a necessary pretence, because if not for that most company buildings would be burned to the ground by disgrunted employees, but if you truly participate in it, you are a moron. While you work overtime to show your manager your dedication, try asking them to overpay you to show you their love and support. We do it because we think it's a noble act, or because we think we must, and companies encourage this because why the fuck wouldn't they - I wouldn't refuse free groceries if my grocer offered them to me of his own will. So yeah, I do believe men in traditional households eventually go a little mad because of the crushing weight of unfulfilled dreams, children growing all fucked because you were paired off with another 20 something child to make a new one and are now responsible for ensuring won't become a serial killer or something, of course you'd go a little nuts; growing up poor, a job that will never make you rich, but you want you give your family everything, and you know you never will but the wish never goes away, so of course you go a little nuts; and when you go a little nuts like that, you take it out on your family, and then that gets fucked too, and so, if you haven't had divorced or died by the time you retire, you can finally enjoy the smooth sailing, the incredible coasting, your best years long gone, all your love stories dead, your coolest high-school moments, the decadent wastefulness of university, the sex, drugs, rock and roll, all gone, replaced by creaking knees, a sexual desert, urine that rapes your consciousness every time it randomly dribbles down your thigh. Sure, it can be nice; gardening, sure, growing rare and exotic plants is interesting and stimulating; maybe some DIY, to finally exercise the creativity that has been rotting away in some business or other for half a century, and build something of your own design; oh, I'd need a 3D printer, the metal fusing kind obviously; actually, I should just have a full forge for all the ironman suits I'll build. Actually, I'd need a woodwork station too, because when I forge my knives I'll need to make wooden handles for them. Actually, maybe I could purchase some land and just throw a few shipping containers there, each one a full workshop of a particular kind. I won't know how to use most of it, but I'll learn, it's not like I have anything better to do. I still haven't learned the guitar I bought sixty years ago with the same unwavering faith in my own persistence, but I will get this done because this is what I actually really truly want to do. Actually, fuck this I don't need to explain myself to you. In fact, I am going to do this right now. Seriously. Wait, let's get an estimate so I can strategize my financial decisions. 
Hmmm.
Meh. Fuck this. I'll just watch TV. I'd masturbate, but due to operational constraints this is now a fairly complicated and time-consuming procedure; much as I love orgasms, after a certain point it's just work. Plus it hurts.
You laugh, but this will happen to you. This is not a bad thing, we are not designed to be excited by anything forever; the most passionate love turns into distant grating irritation eventually, and the most elegant blowjobs chafe after a while; no matter what your gender, after a lifetime of work, when you finally lay in your bed, the day you retired, your mind searches for meaning because this is what idle minds do; it searches for meaning, and finds none; it searches for a significant achievement that still matters after retirement, and finds none; you look back at your cupboard full of awards; they're slightly tarnished, and the old ones just look like glittery brick now, but once upon a time, they meant a lot, and they were shiny and golden. The company orders these in bulk, because it's cheaper that way, and they are often a nice way to boost employee morale and encourage stronger performances, which is all a euphemism for encouraging more work for the same pay for a trinket with your name on it.
You reminisce about beautiful moments with your family, about a dozen or two scattered across four decades because you worked during the day, and when the family gets together in the evening they're all tired and can't be fucked anymore; sure, every heavy work-week had a weekend I could have travelled or seen a movie or had a fancy dinner or gone on a cruise, but I was tired, wasn't I. I mean, after a week of working like a fucking donkey, wouldn't you just want to sleep in on the weekend? You think of your children, and the documentary of their life you build in your mind is but little strips punctuated by long blank spaces; you remember them being infants, and then they were walking, then they were teenegers, then you stopped talking, and then they left; nah, it's too late for all that now, you've finally retired - you deserve to just relax and be happy. A couple decades of relaxation and happines to look forward to, unless you die, of course. Sure, there's always the dribbling urine and the increasing frequency and destructiveness of your sharts, and you stopped being able to run forty years ago and can at best manage a slightly faster walk, because any faster and your ankles will start making that loud clicking sound that scares the children; you look at the trees, and think of all the trees you used to climb, and how for each of them, there was one heartbreaking moment of final contact; one day I climbed it, and I got off it, and my hands left its ant-covered bark, never to return again for the rest of time; the way your parents put you down for the last time and never picked you up again, the significance of that moment so unappreciated. And as you look back at the desolate wasteland that is your memory of your own life, scattered snapshots of a few random moments, precious mental storage space wasted on so much pointless nonsense, that memory of the bathroom sink you blocked up with your vomit during a particularly violent drinking session with your degenerate friends; you sometimes forget to feed the dog, but the image of that vomit filled sink will never go away.
The tragedy is, most people do not have to wait until they retire to be hit with this realization; for most, a decade of professional life makes the ultimate fact of life humiliatingly clear, that you are not special, and you never were; your mother lied to you every time she said it, she said it because that was her job; your job was not special, nor were you a special employee; maybe you achieved more, maybe you made more money, but all the billions in the world will not save you from the dribbling urine or the violent sharts, and whether your sheets are cotton or silk or linen, you will die, and there is nothing after that, no special access afterlife for all your spectacular achievements, no lifetime achievement awards from the united nations, no elaborate apology from all of humankind for having overlooked your blinding genius all your life, and for having let you be just another person - but that can't be helped, can it - because that is what you are - just another person, just another job, just another love story, just another nasty divorce, just another traumatic, soul-rending incident; just another number in the core of the machine of democracy, just another employee of your lovely employer; whether you are the CEO of Whatever or the King of Wherever, eventually, you will die, and extremely soon after that, people will stop giving a shit.
Of course you'd go a little nuts. A housewife probably hase it easier on the psyche; they have their own set of problems, but atleast the underlying goal of housewifehood doesn't seem to be to trick you into an empty life and leave you to rot once you're too old to contribute. 
How did I get here? Oh yeah, the insurance advertisement; the mom screaming angrily at the man-child husband and the asshole children and odious inlaws and menstrual cramps (she looked too young for menopause) and the bitches in the kitty party and the rest of the universe while at it, looking so cute doing it, all covered in flour and grease until her neck, because the face is always flawless, perfectly made up with lipstick - the face is the moneymaker and cooking a meal is no excuse to led standards slip. 
Here's the problem. Every single face I could see was smiling. So fucking happy. One of the grooms, the one in the dance video, was wearing a suit; this was clearly the more serious, formal half of the couple. He was leading the dance, and he was dancing furiously, like Basanti trying to save lives. And he was happy. Now I understand happines, I have been happy several times myself, but he was somewhere else, somewhere slightly after happiness in the direction of worrying behavior, where you smile harder than you usually do, so you don't have enough practice of smiling this wide, so your face goes asymmetrical and deranged, one eye kinda squinted, six teeth showing on the left side but eight on the right because your left cheek and right cheek aren't pulling at your lips the same amount....(long sigh) what was I saying? You don't know either? You people make me SICK. (glasses off, cover eyes, 30 second pregnant pause, wait until it goes into labor)
So the proposal video. I just don't get the point. I've been asked to do something like this exactly once, and that was just for me to hold up a letter of the alphabet, as part of the required number of people to each hold up their own letter, so when put together it spelled Happy Birthday. My first response was "absolutely not fuck yourself",but as I thought more, I understood some things about it. Of course, the primary message is the demonstration of collaboration, and an emphasis on the fact that  I gave up trying to understand this not too long after this incident.

Now, you might be wondering about the proposal video. To be honest, I didn't watch all of it. I went to pee, and I accidentally closed the tab. I could have found it again, as I remembered the title so well, but I really couldn't be fucked. 

I love Alan’s idea about taking out a piece of paper and reading the punchline. 
And then after a big laugh from the audience, he should look confused and say; I don’t get it.
Then ask someone in the audience to explain it to him.
Then say the next joke, pull out the paper to read the punchline and laugh uncontrollably before he can even get it out.
Then say the line really badly and get few if any laughs.
Then ask the audience; Do you… uh… do you w… do you want me to explain it to you?
