Hi. I'm Arvind.
Thank you. Shut up.
This is my first time. My preparation for this was a nap and 4 shots of vodka. I'm a little worried. Hmmm. What should we talk about. Politics is out of the question because I am not planning to die until next August atleast. 
Plus you cannot reason with morons. Plus what would be the point? We can have the swacch bharats and demonetizations and the GDP and the G20 summit and the military logistics and highways in the mountains, but after this 
show, you'll go home, I'll go home, and we'll be back to being poor and miserable. We can have the festivals and the culture and the religion and the divine and devotion and the saints and holy rivers, but after the ardent 
prayers, you'll go home, I'll go home, and we'll be back to being poor and miserable. Anyone here watch Imlie? It's, well, it's a show. It's got some people and stuff keeps happening to them, or they keep doing stuff to 
themselves or each other or other people. I think it satisfies whatever part of people caused human zoos to become popular: just having some people in a little box that you can watch be more miserable then you are. I used to 
watch passively early on, never really paid attention, but I knew the faces and voices. Then there's a huge gap, because my mom got bored of it. And then at some point she started again, but this time all the faces were new, 
including Imlie's. Of course, it was the daughter of the Imlie I knew of and ignored. If my mom were the star of this show instead, I'd be named Radhasree. That'd have been funny. Anyway. Something you should know about me: I 
love everything absurd, stupid, and senseless. The more meaningless, the better. I love Rakhi Sawant, Kim Kardashian (note I don't mention Paris Hilton or Britney Spears - they didn't have a choice. This is me trying to be 
topical, but I stopped following pop music, musicians, and culture, in 2002, so if I'm travelling and I don't have any electronic devices, as I masturbate, among the thousands of images floating around in this head, there's 
jennifer lopez, jessica alba, maybe cindy crawford because older women hmm never mind. What was I talking about? Oh yeah, Imlie and Cindy Crawford.
